% Introduction to My Book
% W. Caleb McDaniel
% July 10, 2012

<div class="well">The following text is a preprint version of the introduction
to my book, *The Problem of Democracy in the Age of Slavery:
Garrisonian Abolitionists and Transatlantic Reform*, which is now available on <a href="http://www.amazon.com/Problem-Democracy-Slavery-Abolitionists-Transatlantic/dp/0807150185/">Amazon</a>. The book is part of the <a href="http://lsupress.org/books/by-series/antislavery-abolition-and-the-atlantic-world/">Antislavery, Abolition, and the Atlantic World</a> series, and this preprint appears here by agreement with LSU Press.</div>

On April 14, 1865, hours before Abraham Lincoln sat down for the
last time at Ford’s Theater in Washington, D.C., the famous abolitionist
William Lloyd Garrison sat down for the first time in Charleston, South
Carolina. More than three decades before, Garrison had founded the
Boston *Liberator,* a newspaper dedicated to universal, immediate slave
emancipation. In 1833, he helped found the American Anti-Slavery Society
(AASS), a group devoted to the same goal. And by the time he went to
Charleston, Garrison had served as the society’s president for over
twenty years. Only in the last few, however, had emancipation changed
from a despised, minority opinion to the official policy of federal
armies in a cataclysmic civil war. With the war now ending and a
constitutional amendment to abolish slavery awaiting ratification,
Garrison had come to Fort Sumter to attend a flag-raising ceremony at
the invitation of Lincoln’s administration.[^1]

 Undoubtedly Garrison’s emotions about the trip were difficult to
express, and not only because he met recently emancipated slaves, one of
whom pressed a ten-dollar bill into his hand. Garrison’s emotions were
also stirred because he could now celebrate a country he had long
regarded with deep disillusionment—even disgust. That disillusionment
had two main causes. Four million of Garrison’s countrymen had been
considered chattel property just three years before. But the
abolitionists who had worked for three decades to abolish this evil met
with nearly unremitting hostility, even in the “free states” of the
North. Garrison once confessed to feeling more at home in Britain, which
abolished slavery in its West Indian colonies only two years after he
started his paper, and as recently as 1860, Garrison had objected to
having the American flag wave over his head. Now, five years later, he
literally helped pull the Star-Spangled Banner up the flagpole at Fort
Sumter, accompanied by his friend of thirty-two years, British
abolitionist George Thompson.[^2]

Thompson was also at his side two years later when Garrison was toasted
in London at a public breakfast held in his honor. It was Garrison’s
fourth trip to Great Britain, and among the crowd were other British
abolitionists who had supported Garrison for two decades or more. There
was Richard Davis Webb, a Dublin printer. There was the lawyer William
Shaen, longtime associate of William Henry Ashurst, who had once served
as the London correspondent for the *Liberator.* These were two of the
many reformers whom Garrison could recognize on sight. But dotting the
crowd were also many internationally famous reformers, including John
Bright, the meeting’s chairman; Victor Schoelcher, the French
abolitionist; and John Stuart Mill, member of parliament for
Westminster, author of *On Liberty,* and a leading figure for liberal
thinkers on both sides of the Atlantic.[^3]

Before 1867, Garrison and Mill had never met, and at first glance they
had little in common. One was a lifelong printer and agitator, the other
a statesman and philosopher. Garrison was the son of an alcoholic father
and pious mother who never received much formal education; Mill, who was
raised in the shadow of famous English philosophers like his father
James Mill and the utilitarian Jeremy Bentham, learned to read classical
Greek at the age of three. But Mill knew about Garrison. In the 1830s,
he had read about American abolitionists in the essays of the English
writer Harriet Martineau. Mill had also followed Garrison’s career as an
advocate of women’s rights, and he shared Garrison’s abhorrence of
chattel slavery. It was thus only with slight exaggeration that Mill
wrote, in 1865, that he had always regarded Garrison’s band of
abolitionists “as the élite of their country, not to say of their
age.”[^4]

Two years later in London, Mill gave a laudatory speech in honor of
Garrison, only a few days after the two men had shared a private moment
at the House of Commons. At a special meal with members of parliament,
Garrison sat next to Mill. And according to the journal of Frederick W.
Chesson, who knew both men, Mill told Garrison upon “shaking hands with
him, that there was no man in the world he was better pleased to see.”
He later invited Garrison to visit his vacation home in France.[^5]

Garrison proved unable to accept Mill’s invitation. But Garrison had
already crossed the English Channel earlier in the month, and he
returned to Paris a few weeks later for an international antislavery
conference. There he received another round of congratulations from
European reformers like the Russian exile and anti-serfdom reformer
Nicholas Tourgeneff and the French liberal Edouard Laboulaye, who
reminded Garrison of his old friend Charles Follen, the German American
exile. And between his two trips to the continent, Garrison also visited
twice with Giuseppe Mazzini, the famous Italian revolutionary.[^6]

Garrison and Mazzini had met twenty years before, and a few days after
their final meeting the Italian sent Garrison a friendly note expressing
his regard, accompanied by a photograph of himself. Garrison, in turn,
later wrote a fond memoir of his “personal friendship” with Mazzini. The
abolitionist acknowledged that his and Mazzini’s “fields of labor were
widely apart, and our modes of action in some respects diverse.” But the
differences between Mazzini and himself, Garrison claimed, were slighter
than the similarities: “we cherished the same hostility to every form of
tyranny, and had many experiences in common.”[^7]

In that single, telling line, Garrison opened a revealing window onto
the world he had known for fifty years: a world in which American
abolitionists were connected to a transatlantic host of reformers as
diverse as Thompson, Follen, Chesson, Mazzini, and Mill. This book
places the story of Garrison and his movement within that wider world,
and in so doing explains how and on what terms one of American history’s
most radical critics came to stand beneath the flag.

------

The primary experience that Garrison, Mill, and Mazzini had in
common was that of being antislavery in an age of slavery. But this book
highlights another experience they shared: they defended democracy in an
age of aristocracy, monarchy, and doubt about democracy’s future. These
experiences differed, however, according to location, or what Garrison
called each man’s “field of labor.”

All three reformers lived through an epochal transformation in world
history: the abolition, in about one hundred years, of a transoceanic
system of slavery that had thrived since the fifteenth century. Between
the American and Haitian revolutions of the late eighteenth century and
the Brazilian abolition of 1888, millions of African-descended people
held as slaves in the Western hemisphere became free in the eyes of the
law, while observers on both sides of the Atlantic came to regard
slavery as antithetical to human progress. But during these dramatic
changes, abolitionism remained more unpopular in America, and for
longer, than in Europe.[^8]

In Mill’s England, Parliament abolished British West Indian slavery in
the 1830s, after which many Britons considered being antislavery
synonymous with being British. In Europe itself, chattel slavery had
largely disappeared as a legal institution by the time that New World
African slavery began, so reformers like Mazzini never lived in the sort
of slave societies that grew up across the Atlantic. In the
post-revolutionary United States, by contrast, the federal government
gave numerous protections to a powerful southern planter class, enabling
slavery to expand rapidly in space and scale. American slavery proved so
resilient that only civil war succeeded in destroying it.[^9]

Even emancipations outside the antebellum United States often
strengthened the hand of slavery’s defenders there. After the lengthy
wars that ended slavery in Haiti, American slaveholders argued that
merely discussing abolition would provoke apocalyptic bloodshed. British
abolitionists and their few American allies countered by pointing to the
British West Indies as a “mighty experiment” in emancipation that proved
its safety and wisdom. But that strategy faltered in the face of racism,
American Anglophobia, fears of insurrection or sectional strife, and
discouraging economic growth in the post-emancipation Caribbean.[^10]

The small minority of Americans who demanded immediate emancipation thus
remained on the defensive throughout the first five decades of the
nineteenth century. Even antislavery politicians like Lincoln suggested
that American slavery could only end gradually and might well survive
until the 1890s or beyond, while more radical abolitionists like the
“Garrisonians”—as members of the AASS were known—faced threats,
ostracism, and even physical violence. So it was no wonder that
abolitionists looked to England as a safer haven where they could
“breathe freely,” as Garrison put it. Temporary exile in Great Britain
provided resources, refuge, and respite from an age of slavery whose end
was not yet assured.[^11]

The fate of democracy was also far from assured when Garrison’s career
began. By 1855, more than half a century after French and American
revolutionaries created self-governing republics, democratic governments
were still few and feeble on both sides of the Atlantic, and the enemies
of democracy—monarchs, aristocrats, and their conservative
defenders—still clung tightly to the reins of power in almost every
state. Clandestine networks of agitators like Mazzini tried to revive
popular revolution in Europe after 1815, but most members of these
groups were forced to live in exile, and in their new homes they still
often aroused suspicion for their radical views. Even when French
revolutionaries succeeded in overturning another monarch in 1830, the
French electorate grew only to around 200,000 men—a number representing
less than 1 percent of the whole population.[^12]

Elsewhere, universal suffrage remained as controversial as the idea of
immediate emancipation in the United States. In the United Kingdom,
parliamentary reformers modified the composition of the electorate with
the passage of the Reform Act of 1832. But by 1848, despite a massive
decade-long Chartist movement calling for universal manhood suffrage,
the number of Englishmen who could vote still hovered consistently at
just under 20 percent of all adult males in England. Another broadening
of the franchise would not occur until a second Reform Bill in 1867,
whose merits Garrison heard being debated in the House of Commons before
he lunched with Mill.[^13]

In the United States, by contrast, universal white manhood suffrage was
the law in most states by 1855, making the country an unusual experiment
in political democracy. Just as many European and American writers
turned to the British West Indies or Haiti to observe the effects of
slave emancipation, scores of European travelogues, essays, and books
about American democracy appeared in the decades when abolitionists were
most active. Alexis de Tocqueville’s *Democracy in America,* published
in 1835 and 1840, was only the most famous. As Mill noted in the first
of his two reviews of that book, the United States was “usually cited by
the two great parties which divide Europe as an argument for or against
democracy. Democrats have sought to prove by it that we ought to be
democrats; aristocrats, that we should cleave to aristocracy, and
withstand the democratic spirit.”[^14]

Yet even in the antebellum United States, “the democratic spirit”
remained contested and limited; all of its gains were hard-won. As
historian Kyle Volk notes, after their own revolution Americans
continued to debate “the boundaries to the democratic creed of majority
rule, the rights of minorities and their proper place in policymaking,
and whether ‘the people’ could ever be too involved in popular
self-government,” as well as “whether public policy should always
reflect public opinion.” Many Americans in the Whig Party still admired
England’s small electorate and property qualifications for voting. And
even the most ardent Jacksonian Democrats were only willing to follow
the democratic tendency so far—to the point of political equality for
adult white men.[^15]

The idea of completely unlimited and equal suffrage was, in short, still
a radical notion in the world abolitionists knew, even to some
abolitionists. In 1843, for example, the political abolitionist James
Birney nearly lost the presidential nomination of the Liberty Party
after some indiscreet public remarks deploring that, “since the time of
Mr. Jefferson, what is called democracy has been on the increase.”
Birney was sure that “no people . . . can advance in moral refinement
and true civilization under the univ[ersa]l Suffrage.” These were not
the views of Garrisonians or most Liberty Party members, but outbursts
like Birney’s showed that “democracy” was not incontrovertible even
among American reformers. As historian Daniel Feller notes, for a
nineteenth-century American democrat surveying the world at large,
“there was reason, in the 1830s and even later, to believe that issues
we now consider settled by then were in fact not settled.”[^16]

In short, when Garrison launched his *Liberator* in 1831, democrats were
largely on the defensive everywhere but in the United States, while
abolitionists were on the defensive everywhere but in Great Britain. The
map of places where a democrat could breathe freely was almost the
photographic negative of those where abolitionists felt at ease. For
American abolitionists, the embattled situation of democrats abroad
raised fears that the tendency of the times could veer back toward
tyranny and away from universal freedom, notwithstanding emancipation’s
recent gains. Conversely, for those struggling for democracy in Europe,
the persecution of abolitionists in the United States seemed to threaten
their own success, since conservatives like Sir Robert Peel could point
to recent mobs and anti-black riots in the United States as arguments
against “experiments” in “popular Government.” As the French
abolitionist Victor Schoelcher wrote in a Garrisonian publication, it
was “an incalculable danger to the democratic idea, both now and
hereafter, that the most democratic people existing should be holders of
Slaves!”[^17]

As Schoelcher realized, events in the nineteenth-century Atlantic World
made it difficult for anyone to debate about slavery without also
debating the legitimacy of different forms of government. But for
abolitionists, the age of slavery exposed problems with both aristocracy
and democracy, with rule by the few as well as rule by the many. On the
one hand, abolitionists understood slavery as it existed in the American
South as antithetical to democracy. Slavery denied the democratic
premise of human equality. It disfranchised millions of black men and
women who in some parts of the South outnumbered whites. And it
empowered a small landed class of slaveholders, a “Slave Power” that
exerted aristocratic control in Congress and legislated in the interests
of the planter class.

On the other hand, the unpopularity of abolitionism and the persistence
of slavery in the United States also revealed problems with democracy.
Slavery survived partly thanks to the votes of congressmen and electors
in northern states where slavery had ended after the revolution. At the
state and municipal levels, laws that benefited slaveholding
aristocrats, repressed northern abolitionists, and discriminated against
free black communities were often ratified by electoral majorities or
their representatives. And what anti-abolitionists could not accomplish
by law they often achieved through violence or harassment that was
tolerated by elected officials. Mobs like the one that disrupted a
meeting of abolitionist women in Boston in 1835 and led Garrison through
the streets by a rope seemed, as one *Liberator* headline put it, to
provide “Another Argument for Sir Robert Peel” that majority rule in the
United States had not been an unqualified good.[^18]

These realities made abolitionists acutely aware of the problem of
democracy: majorities could be unjust, immoral, selfish, and unconcerned
about the oppression of others. Democratic procedures could even allow
enfranchised groups to deny minorities the very same rights they already
enjoyed. Surveying American politics on the eve of the civil war, the
leading Garrisonian orator Wendell Phillips concluded that, “the
weakness of a Democracy is that, unless guarded it merges in despotism.”
Abolitionists like him, more than most Americans, appreciated how easily
“a Democrat . . . will harden into a despot,” and how difficult it was
for a minority to protect itself. But given this awareness, how could
they answer the Peels of the world who doubted “the democratic
principle”?[^19]

------

The problem of justifying democracy despite its potential for
despotism is not an easy one to solve; indeed, it continues to vex
liberal political theorists even in the present. Often democracy is
minimally defined as a procedure for fair political decision-making, yet
even so-called procedural democrats acknowledge that the decisions of a
majority may be wrong or even anti-democratic. As Amy Gutmann and Dennis
Thompson put it, “numerical might does not make a decision morally
right. Majorities have a moral right to govern only because minorities
do not.” Liberal democracy needs protections for minority groups and
individual rights that cannot be overruled by majorities, but debating
procedures and deciding the limits of majority rule often exposes even
deeper moral disagreements. Some theorists, including Gutmann and
Thompson, argue that greater democratic participation and conversation
can deal with these disagreements. But debate continues over how to
justify and create ground rules for deliberation in a way consistent
with procedural fairness and the principles of autonomy and equality on
which democratic procedures are based.[^20]

Similar debates on the legitimacy of democracy began during the age of
slavery, before struggles to establish democratic procedures had even
been settled beyond doubt. Indeed, abolitionists pondered similar
questions together with many European contemporaries. When Phillips
declared that democracy could merge with despotism, he paraphrased
directly from the writings of Tocqueville, whose books on American
democracy Phillips read closely and cited often. Mill also read
Tocqueville’s volumes as soon as they appeared and spent two decades
puzzling over how to shield democratization in England from the dangers
of majoritarian tyranny.[^21]

Like them, Garrisonians saw the problems with the democratic procedure
of majority rule. But unlike many European writers on democracy,
Garrisonians sought ways to correct democracy’s weaknesses without
sacrificing its procedures—the representative institutions and voting
rights which American democrats had fought hard to win. Many of
Tocqueville’s admirers, including Mill, sometimes entertained the idea
of placing limitations on suffrage to keep immoral or incompetent
majorities from running amok, or favored a mixture of aristocracy and
democracy. Garrisonians, on the other hand, typically grew up believing
that the United States government provided a model for the world, and
even their conversions to abolitionism did not entirely destroy that
faith.

While in Scotland during his second transatlantic tour, for example,
Garrison affirmed “the superiority of the American form of government
over every other now existing in the world.” Frederick Douglass, the
famous African American abolitionist who allied with Garrison in the
early 1840s, likewise told British audiences that, “aside from slavery I
regard America as a brilliant example to the world. Only wash from her
escutcheon the bloody stain of slavery, and she will stand forth as a
noble example for others to follow.” Similar statements can be found
scattered throughout the Garrisonians’ writings. Wendell Phillips even
declared that “I have full faith in democratic institutions” and
identified the antislavery movement with “the Democratic principle.”[^22]

These expressions of faith in democratic institutions and principles are
noteworthy because Garrisonians are best known among historians of
abolitionism for their own refusal to vote. For various reasons,
including religious beliefs and interpretations of the constitution,
members of the American Anti-Slavery Society decided after 1840 not to
cast ballots, even for antislavery parties like the Liberty Party,
founded in 1840, or the Free Soil Party, founded in 1848. Instead,
Garrisonians relied exclusively on strategies intended to change public
opinion, like holding meetings, publishing tracts, circulating
petitions, and delivering speeches.

Abolitionists who did join the Liberty Party and the Free Soil Party
often criticized these Garrisonian non-voters for an irresponsible lack
of faith in democratic procedure, and many historians have leveled the
same charge. In 1845, for example, Charles Sumner urged his friend
Phillips to reconsider his refusal to vote, since abolitionists could
not afford to lose any means of influence for the slave. “I think that
you would *speak* in favor of an alteration of the Constitution, why not
*act* in favor of it?” Sumner asked. “Take your place among citizens, &
use all the weapons of a citizen in this just warfare.”[^23]

Other critics of Garrisonian non-voting were less charitable and accused
Garrison of caring more for his own moral purity than for abolition.
They viewed Garrison’s style of agitation, which at one point included
his public burning of the Constitution, as proof of a blind zeal that
could not distinguish at all between what was good in American
institutions and what was bad. As one critic lamented, members of
Garrison’s society seemed to take “the ‘backing out’ principle” to
extremes. “Their plan of navigating our poor misguided ship is to
renounce helm, roles, compass, anchor, all, jump overboard and
scream!”[^24]

Historians have also often seen Garrisonians as self-righteous
separatists who backed out instead of pitching in, adopting a
“remarkably passive plan of action.” On this view, Garrison led his
small band of followers into a “detour” or “moral dead end . . . a
seemingly endless pursuit of self-purification that mistook the
avoidance of politics for progress.” He and his disciples “privileged
the purification of the individual soul, the conversion of individual
hearts and minds against slavery and other worldly corruptions, over the
practical result of abolition.” In short, to many historians, the
classic image of Garrison is of an impractical, “radically antinomian”
religious reformer obsessed with moral perfectionism, rather than a
political activist. By refusing to vote at all, he and his allies
allegedly showed a “contempt for ordinary politics” that came close to
contempt for the democratic process itself.[^25]

The Garrisonians’ own self-professed faith in democratic institutions
has been further obscured by a long tradition in American democratic
theory that began not long after emancipation. In the last years of the
nineteenth century, many American intellectuals began to deprecate the
sort of religious and moral absolutism that could lead someone to burn
laws and spurn ballots. These thinkers saw the inflexibility of
abolitionists like Garrison and Phillips as inimical to the pragmatism
that reformers needed in a complex modern world, where uncertainty and
pluralism were facts of life. Indeed, already by the 1860s, Garrison’s
stock was falling among some of the young liberals who admired Mill, a
philosopher who loved to synthesize seeming opposites into subtle
wholes. The Unitarian Moncure Conway, who briefly joined Garrison’s
movement in the 1850s, breezily remembered the editor as the leader of a
religious sect who refused to work with other abolitionists—in contrast
to Conway himself, who considered himself more open-minded and “knew
good people on both sides.”[^26]

Despite these common criticisms, however, Garrisonians unquestionably
believed in democracy. Indeed, their focus on altering public opinion
required as much faith in democratic procedures as the decisions of
other abolitionists to vote, because Garrisonians assumed that majority
rule allowed changes in public opinion to direct policy. Moreover,
despite their voluntary decisions to refrain from voting, Garrison and
his allies did not call for others to be deprived of their votes. By
advocating equal political rights for women and black Americans, they
demonstrated a more expansive view of suffrage than many antislavery
voters. Garrisonians also echoed the hopes of Schoelcher and their
European friends that the democratic idea would spread to other
countries, and they hated American slavery partly because it robbed the
United States of the role they assumed it should play as a global
exemplar of democracy in action. When Garrison hoisted the flag at Fort
Sumter at the end of the Civil War, he rejoiced that slavery had
perished, but like Lincoln, he was also relieved that government of, by,
and for the people had not.

Still, Garrisonians could not forget the weaknesses of democracy, its
potential drift toward despotism; they knew firsthand what it meant to
be a moral minority in an age when slavery and racism still had numbers
on their side. Though remembered for their own inflexibility, they
themselves knew the damage done by a bad idea when held by an
unreflective and unbending majority. Throughout the antebellum period,
therefore, Garrisonians often meditated not only on the problem of how
to abolish slavery, but also on how to solve the problem of democracy
that their ideas and experiences made plain. To make American democracy
safe for the world, they had to do more than abolish American slavery;
they had to articulate the habits of mind and social practices that
would keep future democratic majorities from abusing their power in new
ways.[^27]

Garrisonian abolitionists wanted to make democracy work, and the key to
that, they believed, was to couple majority rule and democratic
procedures with constant *agitation* by at least some citizens outside
of political institutions. But while this emphasis on agitation as
essential to democracy was ultimately the thing that most endeared
Garrisonians to Mill, it was not a self-evident truth to Americans at
the time. By the time Garrison founded the *Liberator,* many
conservatives and radicals alike viewed agitation by private clubs and
extra-parliamentary movements as possible threats to the rule of law,
which democratic citizens should control through more orderly forms of
civic participation like jury duty and voting. Surveying the United
States of the 1830s, Supreme Court Justice Joseph Story spoke for many
American thinkers in deploring “Ultraism” and the “restless spirit of
innovation and change—a fretful desire to provoke discussions of all
sorts.” Many others criticized abolitionist agitation more explicitly as
a threat to the harmony of the Union, which—as the world’s mighty
experiment of democracy—had to be preserved even at the expense of
discussing divisive ideas.[^28]

In short, most antebellum Americans assumed that what made the United
States a democracy were its political institutions and procedures, not
the extent to which unpopular views could be expressed. But Garrisonian
abolitionists preached that dissent was as necessary in a democracy as
suffrage, representative institutions, or the rule of law. While certain
of their own moral rectitude, they also articulated a defense of
constant deliberation and free inquiry that later democratic thinkers
might have recognized. Because other deeply held views had been proved
wrong in the past, and because passive conformity favored political
tyranny, Garrisonians believed, in Phillips’s words, that “unintermitted
agitation” was essential to self-government—a controversial point in
their day, but an important one in the history of American democratic
thought.[^29]

------

Wendell Phillips best summarized the Garrisonians’ vision of
democracy in 1852, when he compared popular government to an
“ever-restless ocean,” its waves constantly agitated and never still.
Phillips returned to that image frequently, as will this book. But the
ocean was more than a metaphor for abolitionists. Garrisonians also
crossed the actual ocean frequently, revealing the transnational
dimensions of American reform and the extent of transatlantic networks
even in an era of nation-building and civil war.[^30]

As historian C. A. Bayly and others have shown, the nineteenth century
witnessed the birth of a nascent “international civil society” and the
rise of transnational “networks of information and political advocacy
which, though less obvious than the rising national and imperial state,
[were] no less important.” Abolitionists experienced these realities in
their everyday lives thanks to revolutions in transportation and
communications technology that knit the Atlantic World together and
astonished their contemporaries. By the end of Garrison’s life, one
American abolitionist marveled to the Irish abolitionist Richard Davis
Webb about the incredible “wilderness of waters” over which their
letters always crossed. Yet “our regular, constant, almost daily
intercourse by steam mail-vessels” had led these distant friends to
“accept it as a matter of course!”[^31]

Like the generations after them, abolitionists compared their
experiences to the generations before them and concluded that it was a
small world after all. Over the course of Garrison’s five eastward
Atlantic voyages, the length of his trips in days trended steadily
downward: 21, 25, 15, 10, 11. The first westward crossing Garrison ever
made, in 1833, took 42 days by sail; his last return from Europe, in
1877, took 10 days by steam. Those contrasts struck abolitionists as
proof that “the oceans that divided us, have become bridges to connect
us,” as Frederick Douglass put it in 1848. The year before, Douglass had
completed his own first Atlantic crossing, which introduced him to a
vibrant community of reformers who had corresponded with American
abolitionists for a decade or more.[^32]

Transatlantic travel and correspondence also brought American
abolitionists into close contact with a wide range of reform movements,
including Irish Repeal, Corn Law Repeal, and Chartism. As Douglass
pointed out after his first tour of Great Britain, many of the British
reformers whom abolitionists knew identified with “the democratic
element in British politics”; they sympathized with European exiles like
“Louis Kossuth and Mazzini, and with the oppressed and enslaved, of
every color and nation, the world over.” And through these friends
abolitionists joined dense, overlapping networks that spanned the
Atlantic Ocean.[^33]

For a sense of how complex these networks could become, it is enough to
consider one exchange between Mazzini and several of Garrison’s allies
before the Civil War. In 1855, Mazzini wrote a note to the Bristol
Unitarian and abolitionist George Armstrong, telling him that “we are
moving along the same path,” and reporting that he had conveyed a note
from Armstrong to Kossuth, the Hungarian revolutionary. Mazzini had
received Armstrong’s note through Ashurst, a mutual friend of Garrison
and Mazzini. Mazzini had then passed the note to Kossuth’s Italian
secretary, whom he knew. Finally, in a postscript to Armstrong, Mazzini
asked for the address of the Boston abolitionist Maria Weston Chapman,
one of Garrison’s closest allies, who by then had moved to Paris and had
met Mazzini in London. Armstrong, for his part, copied and sent the
whole correspondence to Samuel May Jr., a Massachusetts Unitarian who
had met Armstrong on an abolitionist tour in England.[^34]

Close attention to these networks is important not just for mapping the
nineteenth-century Atlantic World of reform, but also for understanding
Garrisonians better. Like the later Progressive intellectuals studied by
historian James Kloppenberg, the abolitionists’ ideas were “shaped
within a transatlantic community of discourse rather than a parochial
national frame of reference,” and many of their strategies and premises
make sense only within the larger context of the Atlantic World. For
example, Garrisonians partially modeled their strategy of agitating
public opinion from outside Congress on successful extraparliamentary
reform movements overseas, like Daniel O’Connell’s crusade for Catholic
emancipation in Ireland or Richard Cobden’s struggle against the Corn
Laws. They viewed setbacks for abolitionists in America as setbacks to
democracy abroad partly because this is what their own correspondents
affirmed. And finally, focusing on the extent of their transatlantic
networks makes clearer why Garrisonians so often described themselves
not only as democratic agitators, but also as citizens of the world.[^35]

Garrison made his own cosmopolitan ideals clear in the famous motto that
he published on every issue of the *Liberator*: “Our Country is the
World—Our Countrymen are all Mankind.” But between 1831 and 1865, this
motto and its variants also became a mantra for Garrison’s allies on
both sides of the ocean. George Thompson cited it in a speech in
Calcutta in 1843. Charles Follen called it “our watchword from the
beginning.” Douglass claimed Garrison’s motto as his motto, too. And
when Chapman moved to Paris she told Pease that she had gone partly to
teach her daughters to “to become cosmopolitan . . . & to be able to say
with an experimental feeling, ‘My Country is the World My Countrymen are
all Mankind.’” In 1867, Garrison’s friend and ally Henry Clarke Wright,
who spent five years in Europe in the 1840s, inscribed the title page of
the forty-seventh volume of his personal diary with the words: “Henry C.
Wright. Citizen of the World.”[^36]

Becoming “cosmopolitan,” in short, mattered greatly to Garrison and his
allies. When Garrison’s sons published a four-volume memorial biography
of their father, they described “Our Country is the World” as his
“favorite motto” and printed it on the title page of each book. The
motto was printed on memorial cards distributed at Garrison’s funeral.
And it is engraved on the southern side of the Garrison statue that sits
near the Boston Public Library in Copley Square, where Garrison’s
voluminous correspondence with European reformers was deposited after
the Civil War.[^37]

Like their insistence on agitation, the Garrisonians’ cosmopolitanism
often made them unpopular in their day. Many Americans during and after
the American Revolution had once believed that ideals like
cosmopolitanism, world citizenship, and universal benevolence were good
things; loving the world was not incompatible with loving their country.
But the early nineteenth century brought with it hardening notions of
national loyalty that put pressure on these ideals. As Tocqueville
noticed when he toured the country in 1830s, Americans tended towards an
“irritable patriotism” that bristled at any criticism from foreigners.
“Our Country, Right or Wrong”—a popular antebellum slogan—captured the
way that many Americans thought about patriotism.[^38]

Garrisonians, however, believed both that democracy, like an ocean,
should be ever-restless, and that crossing the ocean was good for
democracy. They were wary about the dangers of too much national pride
in a democracy like theirs, a concern that was both reinforced by their
transatlantic experiences and echoed by transatlantic writers.
Contemporary European liberals like Mazzini and Mill also criticized the
sort of nationality that encouraged “senseless antipathy to foreigners,”
and they too defended a vision of democracy in which unpopular or
foreign ideas would not only be tolerated but would be seen as essential
to the health of any nation. Placing Garrisonians alongside and within
the personal networks of European reformers therefore makes clearer the
origins and nature of their own ideas about democracy and patriotism,
while also revealing intellectual and practical connections between
their agitation at home and their activities abroad.[^39]

In sum, by highlighting the Garrisonians’ participation in transatlantic
debates about democracy, slavery, and nationalism, this book presents
abolitionists both as transatlantic agitators and as transatlantic
*thinkers*. Although abolitionists usually did not think of themselves
primarily as intellectuals, they fit David Hollinger’s capacious
definition of intellectuals as a community of people who exchange ideas,
ask shared questions, and probe the “points of contact between minds.”
Words mattered to Garrisonians not just as weapons, but also as carriers
of ideas. And close readings of their speeches, letters, and pamphlets
reveal abolitionists to be appropriate subjects for nineteenth-century
intellectual history.[^40]

To say Garrisonians were thinkers is not, however, to deny they were
activists. On the contrary, this book also presents Garrisonians as
goal-oriented activists who wanted to change politics from without.
Although they did not vote or run for office, Garrisonians were
extra-parliamentary activists who followed political events closely,
thought strategically, and assumed their agitation would have political
effects. To be sure, this depiction again differs from the typical view
of Garrisonians as reformers who cared little about political outcomes.
Historians usually do concede that Garrison “eventually adopt[ed] a
strain of . . . pragmatism,” but this transformation is typically seen
as a late development brought on by the antebellum sectional crisis or
the Civil War, “when events overwhelmed his perfectionism.” Rather than
seeing these events as total breaks from the past, however, this book
shows that Garrisonians were always more interested in politics than is
often assumed. Their tack was never one of total withdrawal from
political engagement.[^41]

Instead, like a later generation of transatlantic liberals studied by
historian Leslie Butler, Garrison and other abolitionists “confronted
what they considered national flaws with a strategy of dissent and
reform rather than a willful retreat from public life.” Throughout their
careers Garrisonians were politically engaged thinkers, or profoundly
reflective activists, neither of which was an oxymoron in the world they
knew. Indeed, whether it is ever appropriate for historians to observe a
strict distinction between political “activists” and “intellectuals,”
recent scholars have made clear that such a distinction often broke down
in the nineteenth-century Atlantic World. In the European context,
historians and political theorists have recently rediscovered
“agitators” like Mazzini or Cobden as complex political thinkers, too.
Mill has been redescribed as both a sophisticated thinker and an engaged
politician. On the other side of the Atlantic, figures once thought of
as disengaged intellectuals, like Emerson, Henry David Thoreau, and
Margaret Fuller, are now recognized as agitators.[^42]

Garrisonians, likewise, were agitators informed by ideas, which were in
turn informed by their agitation. Their experiences as a persecuted
minority raised a set of shared intellectual questions that they tried
to answer in ways that accounted for their experiences. Simultaneously,
however, they never ceased to follow political events, to care deeply
about their effectiveness, or to consider how well their
extraparliamentary tactics were influencing politics. And despite their
criticisms of national pride, they remained vitally concerned with the
reputation of American democracy in the world at large, convinced that
love for country and shame for country were not incompatible
feelings.[^43]

------

Part I of this book begins with Garrison as a teenager, following
him through his conversion to abolitionist work and the origins of his
transatlantic reform networks. These chapters proceed chronologically,
but they emphasize the continuities and persistent ideas that linked the
adolescent Garrison of 1818 to the transatlantic abolitionist of 1854.
Among the most important of these continuities were Garrison’s belief in
the special mission of the United States as a republican model to the
world, and a related belief that “public opinion” had special power to
change American institutions. Those beliefs coexisted with, rather than
being supplanted by, the views for which Garrisonians are still better
known.

Having discussed the experiences of Garrisonian abolitionists up to
1854, I turn in Part II to the intellectual problems that these
experiences posed. These chapters are organized more synchronically.
They emphasize the ways Garrisonian ideas resembled and were sometimes
informed by transatlantic thinkers and activists like Tocqueville,
Mazzini, Mill, O’Connell, Cobden, the Chartists, and the British allies
of Garrisonian abolitionists introduced in Part I.

Part III then returns to the chronological narrative, picking up with
the democratic revolutions that rocked Europe in 1848 and following
Garrisonians into the Civil War, when many new tensions suddenly
appeared between longtime allies like Garrison and Phillips. With this
tripartite structure, which turns from events to ideas and back to
events, I hope to convey something of how Garrisonians themselves turned
back and forth between their experiences as transatlantic abolitionists
and their ideas about democracy, “public opinion,” nations,
cosmopolitanism, and the United States. Reasoning in light of their
experiences, they also interpreted experiences in light of their ideas.

For the purposes of this book, “Garrisonians” were those members of the
American Anti-Slavery Society who remained with the society after a
famous split in its ranks in 1840. Yet even on that definition,
Garrisonians were a diverse lot. They resist generalization partly
because they themselves resisted strict criteria for membership in the
AASS. After 1844, Garrisonians in the AASS were somewhat more united by
the fact that they all identified with the motto “No Union with
Slaveholders” and refused to vote. But they remained divided on a range
of questions about violence, theology, capitalism, and much else. When
drawing generalizations about Garrisonians, I have thus tried to note
significant exceptions to the rule.

My primary focus, however, is on those Garrisonians who belonged to the
organization early enough to experience the schism of 1840; who embraced
its non-voting tactics during all or most of the 1840s and 1850s; and
who then supported the Union war effort and participated in political
campaigns after 1861. I have chosen this focus in order to show why
postwar scenes like Garrison’s trips to Charleston and London were more
explicable than they may appear, but my focus does mean paying less
attention to Garrisonians who left the AASS long before 1861, or who
joined long after 1840, or who were uncomfortable with wartime views
like Garrison’s—a broad spectrum that includes figures like Parker
Pillsbury, George Bradburn, Stephen Foster, Abby Kelley, John A.
Collins, and many black abolitionists. On the other hand, I sometimes
discuss reformers not typically treated as Garrisonians, like Frederick
Douglass. Though he made the decision to support political candidates
for election a decade earlier than Garrison and Phillips, he too
remained a non-voting “disunionist” throughout the 1840s and thus went
through the same transformation they did at a more accelerated rate.

Throughout the book, however, my two main characters are William Lloyd
Garrison and Wendell Phillips—two figures who at first seem almost as
different as Garrison and Mill. Phillips descended from one of the
wealthiest families in Boston’s history and was educated at elite
schools like Boston Latin and Harvard; Garrison was an ink-stained
printer who was viewed as a vulgar fanatic by most Bostonians of
Phillips’s rank. While it was Garrison who eventually met Mill and
Mazzini, it was Phillips who read works by the likes of Mill and
Tocqueville and synthesized their arguments with the outlook of
Garrison’s band.

Despite their differences, each of these men built a life that would not
be intelligible apart from the other. Phillips credited Garrison’s
influence with making him “a better man” and marveled to his friend in
1846 “that our slightly different paths lead always to the same point.”
After Garrison’s death, Phillips confessed that “no words can adequately
tell the measureless debt I owe him, the moral and intellectual life he
opened to me. I feel like the old Greek who, taught himself by Socrates,
called his own scholars ‘the disciples of Socrates.’” While Garrison
remained the president of the AASS for most of its career, Phillips
became the society’s leading intellectual and orator—a man so closely
identified with Garrison by outsiders that they were seen as
inseparable. Together, they helped define the boundaries of Garrisonian
abolitionism in the antebellum period, and despite disagreeing on some
points, Garrison never seriously objected to any argument Phillips made
until the civil war.[^44]

I have chosen to tell a focused narrative of the Garrisonians’ movement
not because it is the only story that could be told, but because it
helps to demonstrate how the age of slavery raised questions for
abolitionists about democracy and agitation, too, including questions
that persisted for Americans, reformers, and democratic theorists well
beyond emancipation. Even the famous rupture between Phillips and
Garrison at the end of their careers, discussed in Part III, serves this
larger goal. In 1863 and 1864, the lifelong friendship between Garrison
and Phillips was riven by a sharp disagreement that divided the AASS
itself into warring camps. Yet these wartime quarrels emerged from
shared questions that long predated and long outlived the specific
causes of dispute.

In particular, Phillips and Garrison had spent decades defending the
agitation of public opinion both as a necessary, permanent feature of
democracy and as an effective way to change politics in a democracy from
the outside. Their alliance broke not on those two points, on which they
always agreed, but on two unresolved questions that this agreement had
obscured: When could and should politicians guide public opinion,
instead of the other way around? And how could extraparliamentary
agitators or politicians ever be sure what the state of public opinion
was? Those questions remained open after their particular age of slavery
had closed, and they persisted for American reformers who lived outside
the period covered by this volume. But to later generations of
reformers, Garrisonians also bequeathed a cosmopolitan patriotism, a
persevering faith in democracy despite its flaws, and a belief in the
importance of ever-restless agitation; how and why they did so is the
subject of this book.

[^1]: Henry Mayer, *All on Fire: William Lloyd Garrison and the
Abolition of Slavery* (New York: St. Martin’s Griffin, 1998), 577–85.

[^2]: Garrison and Thompson told the story about the ten-dollar bill to
Frederick W. Chesson. See the entry for June 10, 1867, in Frederick
Chesson Diary, May 1867–April 1868, REAS, 11/15. For Garrison’s
deprecating comment about the American flag, see “Independence Day:
Anti-Slavery Celebration at Framingham,” *Liberator,* July 20, 1860.

[^3]: See *Proceedings at the Public Breakfast Held in Honour of William
Lloyd Garrison, of Boston, Massachusetts, in St. James’s Hall, London,
on Saturday, June 29th, 1867* (London: William Tweedie, 1868); Richard
J. M. Blackett, “‘And There Shall Be No More Sea’: William Lloyd
Garrison and the Transatlantic Abolitionist Movement,” in *William Lloyd
Garrison at Two Hundred: History, Legacy, and Memory,* ed. James Brewer
Stewart (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2008), 36–37. On
Mill’s importance to transatlantic liberals, see Leslie Butler,
*Critical Americans: Victorian Intellectuals and Transatlantic Liberal
Reform* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2007), 109–20.
Previous studies of transatlantic abolitionism which have informed this
work include David Turley, *The Culture of English Antislavery,
1780–1860* (London: Routledge, 1991); Frank Thistlethwaite, *The
Anglo-American Connection in the Early Nineteenth Century*
(Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1959); Betty Fladeland,
*Men and Brothers: Anglo-American Antislavery Cooperation* (Urbana:
University of Illinois Press, 1972); Howard Temperley, *British
Antislavery, 1833–1870* (London: Longman, 1972); Clare Taylor, ed.,
*British and American Abolitionists: An Episode in Transatlantic
Understanding* (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1974); R. J. M.
Blackett, *Building an Antislavery Wall: Black Americans in the Atlantic
Abolitionist Movement, 1830–1860* (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State
University Press, 1983). A focus on the transatlantic dimensions of
abolitionism informed and shaped the magisterial works of David Brion
Davis, including *The Problem of Slavery in the Age of Revolution*
(Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1975), and *Slavery and Human
Progress* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1984).

[^4]: John Stuart Mill to Moncure Daniel Conway, October 23, 1865, *CWJSM*
16:1106. See also Mill to Harriet Taylor, October 29, 1850, *CWJSM*
14:49–50; Mill to John Robertson, October 2, 1838, *CWJSM* 13:389; Mill
to Harriet Taylor, March 31, 1849, *CWJSM* 14:21–23; *Oxford Dictionary
of National Biography,* online ed., s.v. “Nichol, John Pringle
(1804–1859).” One of Mill’s close friends was the astronomer John P.
Nichol, who in 1853 married Elizabeth Pease, one of Garrison’s closest
friends since the late 1830s.

[^5]: Entry for June 20 in Frederick Chesson Diary, May 1867–April 1868,
REAS; WLG to HEG, August 12, 1867, *LWLG* 5:527. Mill also told John
Elliot Cairnes that “it would have given you great pleasure had you been
at the Garrison breakfast, and heard, especially Bright, and Garrison
himself” (Mill to John Elliot Cairnes, June 30, 1867, *CWJSM* 16:1284).
In 1868 Mill would also contribute to a National Testimonial fund for
Garrison; see WLG to National Testimonial Committee, 12 March 1868,
*LWLG* 6:42. The year after that Garrison would regret that Mill was not
reelected. See WLG to Mary Estlin, January 1, 1869, *LWLG* 6:97; WLG to
SMJr, July 23, 1869, *LWLG* 6:126.

[^6]: *Special Report of the Anti-Slavery Conference, Held in Paris . . .
on the Twenty-Sixth and Twenty-Seventh August, 1867* (London: British
and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society, 1867); WLG to HEG, June 7, 1867,
*LWLG* 5:499–501; entries for June 20 and June 23 in Frederick Chesson
Diary, May 1867–April 1868, REAS; WLG, introduction to *Joseph Mazzini:
His Life, Writings, and Political Principles,* ed. Emilie Ashurst
Venturi (New York: Hurd and Houghton, 1872), viii.

[^7]: Venturi, ed., *Joseph Mazzini,* xi, vii. See also WLG to William
Lloyd Garrison, Jr., August 14, 1867, BPL, Ms.A.1.1.7.52.

[^8]: On these changes, see recent syntheses by Seymour Drescher,
*Abolition: A History of Slavery and Antislavery* (Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge University Press, 2009), esp. ix-x; David Brion Davis,
*Inhuman Bondage: The Rise and Fall of Slavery in the New World* (New
York: Oxford University Press, 2006); Robin Blackburn, *The American
Crucible: Slavery, Emancipation and Human Rights* (London: Verso, 2011).

[^9]: On British national identity and antislavery after emancipation, see
Richard Huzzey, *Freedom Burning: Anti-Slavery and Empire in Victorian
Britain* (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, forthcoming).

[^10]: See Edward Bartlett Rugemer, *The Problem of Emancipation: The
Caribbean Roots of the American Civil War* (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State
University Press, 2008); Seymour Drescher, *The Mighty Experiment: Free
Labor versus Slavery in British Emancipation* (New York: Oxford
University Press, 2002); Carl Paulus, “The Slaveholding Crisis: The Fear
of Insurrection, the Wilmot Proviso, and the Southern Turn against
American Exceptionalism,” Ph.D. diss., Rice University, 2012.

[^11]: WLG to Harriet Minot, March 19, 1833, *LWLG* 1:215. In November
1861, one of Lincoln’s potential timetables for “gradual, federally
compensated emancipation” in Delaware would have allowed slavery there
to exist until 1893. See George M. Fredrickson, *Big Enough to Be
Inconsistent: Abraham Lincoln Confronts Slavery and Race* (Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2008), 95-96.

[^12]: Mike Rapport, *1848: Year of Revolution* (New York: Basic Books,
2008), 1–41. According to Rapport, after the French Revolution of 1830,
“the electorate swelled to include only 170,000 of France’s richest men:
this was a mere 0.5 per cent of the French population, a sixth of those
who enjoyed the vote in Britain after 1832” (p. 3). Timothy Roberts puts
the size of the French electorate under Louis Philippe at “the
wealthiest 250,000 men out of a population of some 35 million, about
twice as large as the U.S. population in 1840.” See Timothy Mason
Roberts, *Distant Revolutions: 1848 and the Challenge to American
Exceptionalism* (Charlottesville, Va.: University of Virginia Press,
2009), 12. On exiles, see Bernard Porter, *The Refugee Question in
Mid-Victorian Politics* (Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press,
1979); Sabine Freitag, ed., *Exiles from European Revolutions: Refugees
in Mid-Victorian England* (New York: Berghahn, 1999).

[^13]: K. Theodore Hoppen, *The Mid-Victorian Generation, 1846–1886* (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1998), 237–39; James Vernon, *Politics
and the People: A Study in English Political Culture, c. 1815–1867*
(Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 1993).

[^14]: John Stuart Mill, “De Tocqueville on Democracy in America [I],”
*CWJSM* 18:50. See also David Paul Crook, *American Democracy in English
Politics 1815–1850* (Oxford, U.K.: Clarendon Press, 1965).

[^15]: Kyle G. Volk, “The Perils of ‘Pure Democracy’: Minority Rights,
Liquor Politics, and Popular Sovereignty in Antebellum America,”
*Journal of the Early Republic* 29, no. 4 (Summer 2009): 641–79, qtd. on
644. On the contradictions inherent in “democracy” during these period,
compare Daniel Walker Howe, *What Hath God Wrought: The Transformation
of America, 1815–1848* (New York: Oxford University Press, 2006); Sean
Wilentz, *The Rise of American Democracy: Jefferson to Lincoln* (New
York: W. W. Norton, 2005); Alexander Keyssar, *The Right to Vote: The
Contested History of Democracy in the United States* (New York: Basic
Books, 2000).

[^16]: Dwight L. Dumond, ed., *Letters of James Gillespie Birney,
1831–1857* (2 vols., New York: D. Appleton-Century, 1938), vol.
2:733–34, 744–45, qtd. on 733; Daniel Feller, “Rediscovering Jacksonian
America,” in Melvyn Stokes, ed., *The State of U.S. History* (New York:
Berg, 2002), 82. See also Betty Fladeland, *James Gillespie Birney:
Slaveholder to Abolitionist* (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press,
1955), 215–26; Aileen S. Kraditor, *Means and Ends in American
Abolitionism: Garrison and His Critics on Strategy and Tactics,
1834–1850* (1969; rpt., Chicago: Ivan R. Dee, 1989), 149.

[^17]: “Sir Robert Peel at Tamworth,” *Liberator,* October 24, 1835;
Victor Schoelcher, “American Slavery, and the London Exhibition,”
*Liberty Bell* 12 (1852): 167.

[^18]: “Another Argument for Sir Robert Peel,” *Liberator,* October 24,
1835.

[^19]: Wendell Phillips, “Idols,” in *SLL,* 249; “The Republican Scholar
of Necessity an Agitator,” *Liberator,* August 21, 1857. For another
scholar who explores how abolitionists confronted this problem, with an
emphasis on their debts to republican ideology, see Daniel J. McInerney,
*The Fortunate Heirs of Freedom: Abolition and Republican Thought*
(Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1994).

[^20]: Amy Gutmann and Dennis Thompson, *Democracy and Disagreement*
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1996), 28. See also the
essays in Seyla Benhabib, ed., *Democracy and Difference: Contesting the
Boundaries of the Political* (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
Press, 1996); Nancy L. Rosenblum, ed., *Liberalism and the Moral Life*
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1989).

[^21]: Other central concerns in contemporary democratic theory, like the
problem of how to reconcile individualism with social feeling and
obligation, also date to this period and are mentioned below, but they
will occupy less of this book. For a good recent summary of one such
strand of democratic theory that stretches back to Tocqueville, see
Johann N. Neem, “Taking Modernity’s Wager: Tocqueville, Social Capital,
and the American Civil War,” *Journal of Interdisciplinary History* 41,
no. 4 (Spring 2011), 591–618.

[^22]: WLG to Marcus Gunn, July 27, 1840, *LWLG* 2:672; John W.
Blassingame, ed., *The Frederick Douglass Papers, Series One: Speeches,
Debates, and Interviews* (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press,
1979), vol. 1:212; Wendell Phillips, “A Metropolitan Police,” *SLL,*
522; Phillips, “Disunion,” in *SLL,* 348.

[^23]: Charles Sumner to Wendell Phillips, February 4, 1845, in *The
Selected Letters of Charles Sumner,* ed. Beverly Wilson Palmer (Boston:
Northeastern University Press, 199), vol. 1:144.

[^24]: Elizur Wright, Jr., to James G. Birney, 6 February 1844, in Dumond,
ed., *Letters of James Gillespie Birney* 2:778.

[^25]: James Oakes, *The Radical and the Republican: Frederick Douglass,
Abraham Lincoln, and the Triumph of Antislavery Politics* (New York: W.
W. Norton, 2007), 8, 9; Bruce Laurie, *Beyond Garrison: Antislavery and
Social Reform* (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2005), 5; Margot
Minardi, *Making Slavery History: Abolitionism and the Politics of
Memory in Massachusetts* (New York: Oxford University Press, 2010), 92;
Peter C. Myers, *Frederick Douglass: Race and the Rebirth of American
Liberalism* (Lawrence: University of Kansas Press, 2008), 83; Louis
Menand, *The Metaphysical Club: A Story of Ideas in America* (New York:
Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2001), 15. I quote these authors not to
criticize their excellent books, which are not primarily or only about
Garrisonians anyway, but instead to show how resilient these views
remain even in recent historiography. For a good introduction to earlier
scholarship, see Betty L. Fladeland, “Revisionists vs. Abolitionists:
The Historiographical Cold War of the 1930s and 1940s,” *Journal of the
Early Republic,* 6 (Spring 1986): 1–21.

[^26]: Moncure Daniel Conway, *Autobiography: Memories and Experiences*
(Boston: Houghton Mifflin and Co., 1904), vol. 1:185. On uncertainty and
flexibility as key concepts for Progressive-era democratic thinkers, see
Menand, *The Metaphysical Club;* James T. Kloppenberg, *Uncertain
Victory: Social Democracy and Progressivism in European and American
Thought, 1870–1920* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1986); and the
somewhat discredited but still insightful Morton G. White, *Social
Thought in America: The Revolt against Formalism* (Boston: Beacon Press,
1957). On Mill’s penchant for resolving contradictions between opposing
philosophies, see Nicholas Capaldi, *John Stuart Mill: A Biography* (New
York: Cambridge University Press, 2004).

[^27]: The phrase “make democracy safe for the world” is adapted from
George Wilson Pierson, *Tocqueville in America* (Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press, 1996), 167.

[^28]: On fears of agitation in the early republic, see Mark G. Schmeller,
“Imagining Public Opinion in Antebellum America: Fear, Credit, Law, and
Honor,” Ph.D. diss., University of Chicago, 2001, chap. 5, Joseph Story
qtd. on 262. Also see Seth Cotlar’s discussion of the early national
backlash against participatory democracy and radical agitation in
Cotlar, *Tom Paine’s America: The Rise and Fall of Transatlantic
Radicalism in the Early Republic* (Charlottesville: University of
Virginia Press, 2011).

[^29]: Wendell Phillips, “Public Opinion,” in *SLL,* 52.

[^30]: Phillips, “Public Opinion,” 54. For a sampling of other recent work
on the mid-nineteenth-century Atlantic world of reform, see Roberts,
*Distant Revolutions*; Angela F. Murphy, *American Slavery, Irish
Freedom: Abolition, Immigrant Citizenship, and the Transatlantic
Movement for Irish Repeal* (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University
Press, 2010); Amanda Bowie Moniz, “Saving the Lives of Strangers: Humane
Societies and the Cosmopolitan Provision of Charitable Aid,” *Journal of
the Early Republic* 29, no. 4 (2009): 607–40; Mischa Honeck, *We Are the
Revolutionists: German-Speaking Immigrants and American Abolitionists
after 1848* (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2011); Kathryn Kish
Sklar and James Brewer Stewart, eds., *Women’s Rights and Transatlantic
Antislavery in the Era of Emancipation* (New Haven, Conn.: Yale
University Press, 2007); Bonnie S. Anderson, *Joyous Greetings: The
First International Women’s Movement, 1830–1860* (New York: Oxford
University Press, 2000); Margaret H. McFadden, *Golden Cables of
Sympathy: The Transatlantic Sources of Nineteenth-Century Feminism*
(Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 1998); Carl J. Guarneri, *The
Utopian Alternative: Fourierism in Nineteenth-Century America* (rpt.,
Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1994). For a slightly later
period, see Daniel T. Rodgers, *Atlantic Crossings: Social Politics in a
Progressive Age* (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1998); Ian
Tyrrell, *Woman’s World/Woman’s Empire: The Women’s Christian Temperance
Union in International Perspective, 1880–1930* (Chapel Hill: University
of North Carolina Press, 1991); Leila J. Rupp, *Worlds of Women: The
Making of an International Women’s Movement* (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 1997).

[^31]: C. A. Bayly, *The Birth of the Modern World, 1780–1914* (Oxford,
U.K.: Blackwell, 2004), 118; SMJr to RDW, March 26, 1871, BPL,
Ms.B.1.6.11.9. On the transportation revolution in the United States
during this same period, see Howe, *What Hath God Wrought.* For
overarching surveys of the persistence of the Atlantic World into the
nineteenth century, especially as a zone of cultural and economic
exchange, see Donna Gabaccia, “A Long Atlantic in a Wider World,”
*Atlantic Studies* 1, no. 1 (2004): 1–27; Aaron Spencer Fogleman, “The
Transformation of the Atlantic World, 1776–1867,” *Atlantic Studies* 6,
no. 1 (2009): 5–28; Jürgen Osterhammel and Niels P. Petersson,
*Globalization: A Short History* (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
Press, 2005), 57–80; José C. Moya, “Modernization, Modernity, and the
Trans/formation of the Atlantic World in the Nineteenth Century,” in
*The Atlantic in Global History, 1500–2000,* ed. Jorge
Cañizares-Esguerra and Erik R. Seeman (Upper Saddle River, N.J.:
Pearson, 2007), 179–98; and Thistlethwaite’s still useful *The
Anglo-American Connection.* See also the account of nineteenth-century
transatlantic connections as one of interplay between the continued
“flow” of connections and the “closure” of others in Charles Bright and
Michael Geyer, “Where in the World Is America? The History of the United
States in the Global Age,” in Thomas Bender, ed., *Rethinking American
History in a Global Age* (Berkeley: University of California Press,
2002), 76–77. For scholarship relating European politics and the
Atlantic economy to early American politics and territorial expansion,
see Thomas Bender, *A Nation among Nations: America’s Place in World
History* (New York: Hill and Wang, 2006), 60–115; François Furstenberg,
“The Significance of the Trans-Appalachian Frontier in Atlantic
History,” *American Historical Review* 113 (June 2008): 647–77; John
Craig Hammond, “Slavery, Settlement, and Empire: The Expansion and
Growth of Slavery in the Interior of the North American Continent,
1770–1820,” *Journal of the Early Republic* 32, no. 2 (Summer 2012):
175–206; Rosemarie Zagarri, “The Significance of the ‘Global Turn’ for
the Early American Republic,” *Journal of the Early Republic* 31, no. 1
(Spring 2011): 1–37; Matthew Rainbow Hale, “On their Tiptoes: Political
Time and Newspapers during the Advent of the Radicalized French
Revolution, circa 1792–1793,” *Journal of the Early Republic* 29 (Summer
2009): 191–218; Rachel Hope Cleves, *The Reign of Terror in America:
Visions of Violence from Anti-Jacobinism to Antislavery* (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2009). Also see Andre M. Fleche, *The
Revolution of 1861: The American Civil War in the Age of Nationalist
Conflict* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2012); and
the various works mentioned in two recent forums: “Interchange:
Nationalism and Internationalism in the Era of the Civil War,” *Journal
of American History* 98, no. 2 (2011): 455–89; “AHR Conversation: On
Transnational History,” *American Historical Review* 111, no. 5
(December 2006).

[^32]: Philip S. Foner, ed., *The Life and Writings of Frederick
Douglass,* vol. 1: *Early Years, 1817–1849* (New York: International
Publishers, 1950), 323. For the lengths of Garrison’s trips, each number
represents the number of days for a one-way crossing, rounded up to the
nearest whole day, between Boston and Garrison’s English port, which was
sometimes Liverpool and sometimes London. I have compiled the figures
from Wendell Phillips Garrison and Francis Jackson Garrison, *William
Lloyd Garrison, 1805–1879: The Story of His Life Told by His Children*
(4 vols.; New York: The Century Co., 1885–1889); and correspondence in
*LWLG.* For more on abolitionists’ encounters with steam travel, see my
“Saltwater Antislavery: American abolitionists on the Atlantic Ocean in
the Age of Steam,” *Atlantic Studies* 8, no. 2 (2011): 141–63.

[^33]: Frederick Douglass, *My Bondage and My Freedom,* ed. John David
Smith (1855; New York: Penguin, 2003), 278.

[^34]: See George Armstrong to SMJr, August 14, 1855, and Joseph Mazzini
to George Armstrong, in *BAA,* 416–17.

[^35]: Kloppenberg, *Uncertain Victory,* 10.

[^36]: George Thompson, *Addresses; Delivered at Meetings of the Native
Community of Calcutta: and on Other Occasions* (Calcutta: Thacker and
Co., 1843), 24; Charles Follen, “Speech before the Anti-Slavery
Society,” in *The Works of Charles Follen, with a Memoir of His Life,*
ed. Eliza Lee Follen (Boston: Hilliard, Gray, and Co., 1841), vol.
1:629–30; MWC to EPN, December 25, 1849, Ms.A.1.2.18.88, BPL; HCW-BPL,
vol. 47 (1867).

[^37]: For “favorite motto,” see Garrison and Garrison, *Garrison* 1:xi.
For the memorial cards, see McKim-Garrison Family Papers, New York
Public Library, Box 3, MGF 31.

[^38]: Alexis de Tocqueville, *Democracy in America,* trans. Gerald Bevan
(London: Penguin, 2003), 277. See also Cotlar, *Tom Paine’s America.*

[^39]: Mill qtd. in Maurizio Viroli, *For Love of Country: An Essay on
Patriotism and Nationalism* (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1995), front
matter. See also Georgios Varouxakis, *Mill on Nationality* (London:
Routledge, 2002).

[^40]: David Hollinger, “Historians and the Discourse of Intellectuals,”
in *In the American Province: Studies in the History and Historiography
of Ideas* (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1985), 130–51,
quoted on 132.

[^41]: David W. Blight, “William Lloyd Garrison at Two Hundred: His
Radicalism and His Legacy for Our Time,” in Stewart, ed., *William Lloyd
Garrison at Two Hundred,* 7. Past historiography better recognized the
Garrisonians’ political aims. See especially James Brewer Stewart, “The
Aims and Impact of Garrisonian Abolitionism, 1840–1860,” *Civil War
History* 15, no. 3 (1969): 197–209; Kraditor, *Means and Ends*; Bertram
Wyatt-Brown, “William Lloyd Garrison and Antislavery Unity: A
Reappraisal,” *Civil War History* 13, no. 1 (1967): 5–24. See also Mark
Voss-Hubbard, “The Political Culture of Emancipation: Morality,
Politics, and the State in Garrisonian Abolitionism, 1854–1863,”
*Journal of American Studies* 29, no. 2 (1995): 159–84, which argues
that, despite their “doctrinaire” and “antinomian” religious views,
Garrisonians “were capable of responding to their circumstances in
unpredictable ways,” though these unpredictable departures did not
happen, according to Voss-Hubbard, until after 1854.

[^42]: Butler, *Critical Americans,* 12. See, for example, Anthony Howe
and Simon Morgan, eds., *Rethinking Nineteenth-Century Liberalism:
Richard Cobden Bicentenary Essays* (Aldershot, Hampshire, U.K.: Ashgate,
2006); C. A. Bayly and Eugenio F. Biagini, eds., *Giuseppe Mazzini and
the Globalisation of Democratic Nationalism, 1830–1920* (Oxford, U.K.:
Oxford University Press, 2008); Sandra Harbert Petrulionis, *To Set This
World Right: The Antislavery Movement in Thoreau’s Concord* (Ithaca,
N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 2006); Charles Capper and Cristina
Giorcelli, eds., *Margaret Fuller: Transatlantic Crossings in a
Revolutionary Age* (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 2007); Dean
Grodzins, *American Heretic: Theodore Parker and Transcendentalism*
(Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2002); Nadia Urbinati
and Alex Zakaras, eds., *J. S. Mill’s Political Thought: A Bicentennial
Reassessment* (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2007); Stefan
Collini, *Public Moralists: Political Thought and Intellectual Life in
Britain, 1850–1930* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1991); Butler,
*Critical Americans;* Salvo Mastellone, *Mazzini and Marx: Thoughts Upon
Democracy in Europe* (Westport, Conn.: Praeger, 2003); Nadia Urbinati,
*Mill on Democracy: From the Athenian Polis to Representative
Government* (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002).

[^43]: Christopher Leslie Brown has spotlighted the role that concerns
about a nation’s reputation and “moral capital” played in British reform
movements, and Dorothy Ross has argued that broader narratives of the
rise of antislavery thought, which focus on the progressive unfolding of
liberal or moral sentiment, have obscured the role that nationalism
played as a foundation for antislavery critique, particularly in Abraham
Lincoln’s thinking about emancipation. In this book I will also draw
attention to the role that ideas about the “nation” played even in
transatlantic Garrisonian abolitionism. See Christopher Leslie Brown,
*Moral Capital: Foundations of British Abolitionism* (Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press, 2006); Dorothy Ross, “Lincoln and
the Ethics of Emancipation: Universalism, Nationalism, Exceptionalism,”
*Journal of American History* 96, no. 2 (September 2009).

[^44]: Qtd. in Irving H. Bartlett, *Wendell Phillips: Brahmin Radical*
(Boston: Beacon Press, 1961), 105; “William Lloyd Garrison,” in *SLL:
Second Series,* 466. Focusing on these two figures and their closest
allies does require leaving to other scholars important questions about
the Garrisonians’ constitutional theory, the regional diversity of their
movement, the limits and radicalism of their explanations of human
difference, and even their thinking about the philosophical problem of
human bondage itself. Likewise, this book does not attempt to measure
their effectiveness in changing public opinion or determine the extent
to which Garrisonians contributed directly to the coming of the Civil
War, though it does explain how Garrisonians perceived their
contributions to the conflict and explores the intellectual sources of
those perceptions. Some of the most exciting recent scholarship on the
abolitionist movement has considered the question of how abolitionists
affected the coming of the Civil War. See, for example, Rugemer, *The
Problem of Emancipation*; Elizabeth R. Varon, *Disunion! The Coming of
the American Civil War, 1789–1859* (Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina Press, 2008); James Brewer Stewart, “Reconsidering
Abolitionists in an Age of Fundamentalist Politics,” *Journal of the
Early Republic* 26, no. 1 (2006), 1–24; Stanley Harrold, *Subversives:
Antislavery Community in Washington, D.C., 1828–1865* (Baton Rouge:
Louisiana State University Press, 2003), 253–57. On Garrisonians’
contributions to racial theory, see Bruce Dain, *A Hideous Monster of
the Mind: American Race Theory in the Early Republic* (Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 2002). For good recent works on the regional
diversity and rank-and-file members of the abolitionist movement, see
Stacey M. Robertson, *Hearts Beating for Liberty: Women Abolitionists in
the Old Northwest* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
2010); Julie Roy Jeffrey, *The Great Silent Army of Abolitionism:
Ordinary Women in the Antislavery Movement* (Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press, 1998).


