% Lewis Perry's Civil Disobedience
% W. Caleb McDaniel
% April 28, 2015

<div class="well">This post is the author's pre-print version of my review of Lewis Perry, <a href="http://amzn.com/0300124597"><em>Civil Disobedience: An American Tradition</em></a>, published by Yale University Press in 2013. The final version was published in the <em>Journal of the Gilded Age and Progressive Era</em> 14, no. 2 (April 2015), 272-273, and can be found online at <a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S1537781414000863">Cambridge Journals</a>.</div>

Over the last sixty years, numerous reformers have laid claim to what
the antiwar activist Philip Berrigan called, in 1968, "a rich tradition
of civil disobedience" in American history (25). Often, such activists
have even claimed that civil disobedience is a civil right inherent to
the American democratic tradition itself. "Such claims were not stated
so clearly before the 1960s," notes Lewis Perry in his wide-ranging,
fascinating narrative of the evolution of civil disobedience (25). But
the notion that civil disobedience was a shared heritage of all
Americans "remained strong" in the anti-nuclear and anti-abortion
protests of the 1970s and 1980s, and continues to surface today (304).

Indeed, American activists of many different kinds often share a basic
set of assumptions about civil disobedience---that it was born with the
Boston Tea Party, theorized by Thoreau, pioneered by abolitionists, and
decisively legitimated by the sit-ins and non-violence protests of the
Civil Rights movement. Perry agrees that a "distinctive American
tradition" of civil disobedience does exist (1). But his nuanced and
deeply researched account challenges many of the assumptions behind this
commonly repeated lineage.

For example, Perry finds precedents for modern civil disobedience before
the Boston Tea Party, whose disguised, destructive revolutionaries
looked and behaved quite differently from activists who sat at lunch
counters in their Sunday best and then politely went to jail. Neither
Thoreau nor his contemporaries used the term "civil disobedience," even
though that title was posthumously affixed to his 1849 essay on
"Resistance to Civil Government" in an 1866 collection (95). More
importantly, Perry explains, notions of an unbroken radical tradition
ignore the many critics of and disagreements about civil disobedience in
American society, as well as the historical discontinuities that helped
create what we recognize as civil disobedience today.

For Perry, the most significant of these discontinuities was the
transition from an early era---in which protesters framed acts of civil
disobedience either as a form of *obedience* to higher moral laws, or as
one of many tactics legitimated by a general right of revolution to
overthrow tyrants---to a "new era of disobedience" in which protesters
used it as a practical tool "to advance the rights and aspirations of
groups of citizens" whose civil rights were not being recognized
(155-6). That transition began, slowly, in the antebellum period, with
the primarily moral protests of Christian missionaries against Indian
Removal. Black and white abolitionists, though still often appealing
both to moral duty and the right of revolution, accelerated the shift by
creating new "ways of protesting against law, even violating law, without
forsaking the quest for citizenship" by African Americans (93). But the
transition Perry traces was not fully complete until the 1930s, when
American popularizers of Gandhi's ideas like Richard Bartlett Gregg and
Kirshnalal Shridharani redescribed civil disobedience as a form of
"moral jiu-jitsu," in Gregg's famous metaphor (189).

For Gregg and Shridharani, as well as Civil Rights activists who later
adopted their ideas in what Perry calls "America's Gandhian moment,"
civil disobedience was a tool designed to result in the "conversion or
persuasion of an antagonist" (181, 200). Nonviolence became not (or not
only) a form of obedience to a moral code, but "a source of power"
(200). According to Perry, "one striking feature" of Gregg's work was
"its lack of emphasis on obedience to an absolute higher law,"
especially when compared with accounts of civil disobedience in the
early "nineteenth-century American tradition, which includes Thoreau"
(200).

To explain this shift, Perry pays special attention to the period
between 1866 and 1920, an era usually elided from popular (and even some
scholarly) genealogies of civil disobedience. Indeed, the Progressive
Era was, in two senses, "a crucial period in the making of American
traditions of civil disobedience" (127). First, "New Departure"
suffragists, as well as Wobblies, temperance reformers, and "free
speech" activists who protested the Comstock Law, pioneered protest
rituals that placed civil disobedience in a "new secular vein" (167).
Civil disobedience became, in their hands, a "means for organized
citizens to ... achieve change, while ignoring appeals for moderation,
but without quite engaging in revolution" (156). The pragmatists'
emphasis on the practical effects of ideas also informed the work of
later writers like Gregg, whose idea of "moral jiu-jitsu" drew not only
from Gandhi, but also from his experience as a Progressive labor
organizer, his study of psychology, and the martial metaphors of William
James and Walter Lippmann in their famous essays on the moral and
political equivalents of war.

Activists in the Progressive Era also accelerated the "Americanization
of civil disobedience" by self-consciously claiming to be heirs of the
nation's democratic traditions and by exhibiting a general reverence for
American institutions and laws; they usually accepted the legal
penalties for their disobedience (143). With inventive new legal
strategies designed to create test cases in the courts, Progressive Era
reformers helped join the threads of a distinctively American civil
disobedience---active, but peaceful, confrontation with authorities,
combined with a willingness to suffer whatever legal penalties resulted
from such noncooperation. Yet in doing so, they also bequeathed to later
generations an American tradition of differentiating between legitimate
and illegitimate forms of civil disobedience. That process of
differentiation became even more pronounced after the Civil Rights
revolution of the 1960s, according to Perry. Wider public discussions of
civil disobedience bespoke a general consensus that it was a "source of
strength in America's democratic system" (274). But acceptance of civil
disobedience dependend on an expectation that it stay within certain
limits. "Legitimized and to some degree circumscribed---that was the new
state of civil disobedience" (285).

That is also largely the state of civil disobedience today, Perry
argues. But in his closing chapters, he notes some recent, troubling
departures from the rituals of civil disobedience that Progressive
activists and their heirs worked so hard to establish, both on the part
of activists willing to violate the law anonymously instead of publicly
suffering an unjust penalty, and on the part of law enforcement officers
too intent on the maintenance of order to care much for the almost
choreographed drama of peaceful protest and public arrest that proved so
powerful in the past. Perry's attention to the present-day legacies of
civil disobedience underscore the greatest virtues of this
masterwork---its humane, moral concern, combined with an appreciation of
the surprises, problems, and paradoxes that recur in the history of
"civil disobedience." The term itself is somewhat oxymoronic, Perry
notes, in its odd coupling of civility and resistance. But Perry's
sensitive, engrossing account brilliantly uncovers the historical
conditions that led to that coupling in the United States. It will be
the defining work on its subject for many years to come.
