% Wendell Phillips and the “Ever-Restless Ocean” of Democracy
% W. Caleb McDaniel 
% May 26, 2011

<div id="abstract">
This post was originally published on my old blog as [Wendell Phillips and the
“Ever-Restless Ocean” of Democracy][]. I presented the essay in 2011 at the
[Wendell Phillips Bicentennial Commemoration][] at Harvard Law School in
Cambridge.
</div>

American democracy means, at the very least, majority rule. And Wendell
Phillips was, above all, a democrat. “I plant myself always on
democratic principles," Phillips said in 1865. "I am a democrat,
ingrained, from top to toe.”[^1]

Of course, Phillips could not always be so explicit in calling himself a
democrat, because during his lifetime, the Democratic Party was
committed officially to silencing abolitionists like him. But in
retrospect, few things about Phillips are clearer than that he was a
democrat. In an era when even the Democratic Party committed itself, at
most, to universal white manhood suffrage, Phillips advocated the right
to vote without respect to sex or complexion, and he also publicly
supported the efforts of democratic reformers abroad like the British
Chartists at a time when even male suffrage was still rare and
controversial outside the United States. The abolitionist and Chartist
exile to the United States John C. Cluer, for example, vouched for
Phillips as "a genuine Democrat," and claimed to know that Phillips,
while in England in 1840, had "perilled his popularity by finding his
way into a loft among the Chartists," and speaking and sympathizing with
them, "instead of seeking introductions to the aristocracy."[^2]

A far-sighted advocate for the right to vote, Phillips also planted
himself on the broader democratic principle that the people and "public
opinion" should rule. In an important 1852 speech entitled "Public
Opinion," Phillips even declared that "the people never err." He did not
mean, of course, that every "single verdict which the people of to-day
may record" was right, as he immediately clarified. But he did believe
that "the great democratic tendencies of the masses" moved in the
direction of right, especially over the long run. If, as James Brewer
Stewart notes in his biography, Phillips was born "an offspring of
aristocrats," as a man he became a democrat of democrats.[^3]

Yet Wendell Phillips was also a sharp and sophisticated critic of
democracy. He was a man as far-sighted in his perceptions of democracy's
failings as he was in his appreciation of its strengths. His own
experience as an unpopular abolitionist taught him that while public
opinion could be a force for right, it could also be a bulwark of wrong.
Indeed, in the same speech on "Public Opinion," Phillips noted that
public opinion was "a dangerous thing under which to live," given its
fickleness and the fact that "there is nothing stronger than human
prejudice" when backed by thousands of newspapers, millions of voters,
and tens of thousands of pulpits. The power that democracy gave to the
people meant that when the people were right, government and society
could not prevail against them. But it also meant that when the people
were wrong, their power was just as hard to resist.[^4]

Experience as an abolitionist showed Phillips just how easily majority
rule could license despotic behavior--against black men and women, first
and foremost, but also against the embattled white abolitionist minority
who allied with them. Anti-abolitionist mobs, racial prejudice, and the
willingness of the masses to compromise over slavery to preserve the
Union showed that the people *could* err at particular moments, and
grievously so. When they did, minorities were left to fend for
themselves against what Phillips's friend, the British abolitionist
George Thompson, once called "the terrors of public opinion."[^5]

The problem of slavery in America also made Wendell Phillips acutely
aware of the problem of democracy in America, and in thinking about this
problem, Phillips was part of a larger transatlantic community of
mid-nineteenth-century thinkers who were trying to develop a theory of
democratic government that could answer its enemies while accounting for
its flaws--a community that included English liberal John Stuart Mill,
the Italian revolutionary Giuseppe Mazzini, and many other
contemporaries. A close reading of Phillips's speeches and writings
reveals similarities and points of contacts between Phillips and these
thinkers.[^6]

But Phillips drew particular inspiration from the writings of Alexis de
Tocqueville, whose two-volume magnum opus *Democracy in America*, was a
source of frequent quotations from Phillips. In a memorial biography of
Phillips, abolitionist Theodore Wentworth Higginson noted that Phillips
“drew habitually from but few books, Tocqueville’s ‘Democracy in
America’ being among the chief of these,” and many of Phillips’s
speeches bear out that recollection. In the end, however, Phillips also
developed a vision of democracy that was all his own. This top-to-toe
democrat drew his own answers to the problem of democracy from the fact
that he, unlike Tocqueville, was also a top-to-toe agitator. Phillips
developed a theory of modern democratic society that accorded a vital,
continuing role to dissenters and agitators like himself. In these brief
remarks, I want to briefly examine some of the central components of
this theory, and I want to at least establish that Phillips should be
remembered today not only as a great abolitionist or agitator, but as a
theorist of American democracy whose insights are worth remembering
today.[^7]

Phillips and "The Ocean of Unchained Democracy"
-----------------------------------------------

The fact that Wendell Phillips embraced democracy is a remarkable fact
about him--remarkable whether you consider his personal past, or the
global present in which he lived. First, he was born into the privileged
Brahmin class of Boston elites and Federalist politicians and was
educated at Boston's most elitist institutions. By the time he graduated
from Harvard College, his political instincts still reflected his
background and tended not towards the Jacksonian Democracy but towards
the Whig Party of Daniel Webster. Yet by his senior year of college,
Phillips was already showing signs that he did not fully subscribe to
the elitism on which he was weaned. In his senior compositions, for
example, he recognized that "the most distinguishing characteristic of
the present age is that everything is done for the people ... the many,
not the few." His own past might well have taught Phillips to fear this
brave new world; instead, his writings showed that he embraced what he
saw as a new age of democratized knowledge and popular power.[^8]

Born into a world of personal privilege, Phillips was also born into a
world in which most nations' electorates remained extremely small. Even
by 1848, for example, the number of Englishmen who could vote in
parliamentary elections hovered consistently at just under twenty
percent of all adult males in England. While Phillips was still in
college, in 1830, a revolution in Napoleonic France elevated a more
liberal monarch to the throne, yet even then the electorate grew only to
around 200,000 men--a number representing less than one percent of the
whole population. These tiny numbers were not accidental--in most of the
world that Phillips knew, "the people" were considered a force to be
feared. The dictum "vox populi vox dei"--the voice of the people, the
voice of God--was kept alive mainly by a small, international community
of radical democrats and republican exiles.[^9]

Nonetheless, Phillips endorsed that very dictum--"vox populi vox
dei"--in his aforementioned speech on "Public Opinion." In a world in
which democracy was almost as rare as slavery was pervasive, Phillips
consistently declared that he stood on the side of the people, even at
the risk of alienating the elite society into which he had been born.
There was no greater proof of this than the fact that Phillips chose, in
1837, to align himself with the small, interracial New England
abolitionist movement identified with William Lloyd Garrison, editor of
the *Liberator*. As historian Richard Newman has shown, New England
Garrisonians had recently transformed American abolitionism by
pioneering new methods of agitation that appealed directly to the
people. New England Garrisonians sought to mobilize antislavery groups
at the grassroots, a method that challenged the authority of local
elites who usually wished to keep a lid on discussion about slavery.
Indeed, to the Brahmin crowd into which Phillips was born, the tactics
of abolitionists like Garrison were considered democratic in the vulgar
sense; when Phillips joined the Massachusetts Garrisonians, and married
into their circle, his mother had a difficult time forgiving him.[^10]

Nonetheless, Phillips did not retreat from his defense of democracy as
he became a nationally famous orator for the Garrisonians, a group
considered beyond the pale of respectability even by most abolitionists.
In many of his speeches, he emphasized his continued commitment to the
principle of majority rule as well as of abolition. Ultimately Phillips
came to see the power of slavery as only one of many proofs that "power
is ever stealing from the many to the few"--a tendency towards
anti-democratic rule that had to be constantly checked by the vigilance
of the people.[^11]

This is not to say that Phillips believed "the many" were infallible, of
course; as a leader of an outnumbered, unpopular movement, he
necessarily believed that "the few" were sometimes in the right. Often
he declared that the progress of the nation depended on the "reading
men," the "thinking men," on "intelligent democracy"--the informed and
morally upright few--to instruct ignorant mobs and elevate the "public
opinion" of the nation. Yet unlike some other contemporary critics of
democracy, Phillips never suggested a return to a form of government in
which the few ruled and the many obeyed. Even at the height of the
American Civil War, when Phillips was arguably most dismayed about the
caliber of the nation's elected officials and the state of public
sentiment about race and slavery, Phillips made clear that he believed
the power to legislate and to rule rightly rested with the numerical
majority. In an 1863 speech, Phillips pointed to a temperance law in New
England as an example of a case in which a law had rightly obtained “the
decided, unmistakable sanction of a majority” after a long period of
open discussion and debate. After the law was put on the books, a
"reluctant minority” went to the Legislature and tried “to repeal or
amend it, alleging that this was not a good law,” but they were “voted
down," and Phillips believed that the time had therefore come "when the
minority sits down and obeys.”[^12]

In the case of the temperance law, Phillips actually agreed with the
majority, which made it easy for him to tell the minority to sit down
and obey. But his commitment to the principle that the many should rule
was not situational, and he believed that even in cases when the many
clearly in the wrong, it was futile to suggest that this amounted to an
argument against majority rule. Phillips made the point in 1859, just
after John Brown's Harper's Ferry Raid, with a vivid marine metaphor:

> You may sigh for a strong government, anchored in the convictions of
> past centuries, and able to protect the minority against the
> majority,--able to defy the ignorance, the mistake, or the passion, as
> well as the high purpose, of the present hour; you may prefer the
> unchanging *terra firma* of despotism; but still the fact remains,
> that we are launched on the ocean of an unchained democracy.

Brown was, for Phillips, the clearest example of how out of step the
majority could be with a righteous minority--in Brown's case, a minority
of one. But there was no going back to the *terra firma* of despotism,
for Phillips, no suggestion that democracy should be chained. "The Old
World," Phillips argued in that same speech, "has always distrusted ...
the common sense of the millions" and thus sought to hem the people in
with safeguards and controls. Phillips affirmed, however, that "not only
the inevitable, but the best power this side of the ocean, is the
unfettered average common sense of the masses."[^13]

Phillips and the Dangers of Democratic Despotism
------------------------------------------------

Statements like these, and others like them, showed that Phillips, the
offspring of aristocrats in a world of aristocracy, did not long for a
way to dam up and turn back the tide of mass democracy. But Phillips's
unyielding commitment to "unchained democracy" did not make him
insensible to democracy's weaknesses and flaws; on the contrary, because
he believed there was no going back to the *terra firma* of despotism,
he believed it was essential to confront and resolve democracy's own
peculiar tendencies towards new forms of despotism.

That despotism *could* occur in a democracy was self-evident to an
abolitionist like Phillips, who confronted every day the evidence of
what a wicked and illiberal prejudice could do when it received the
backing of a numerical majority. On the one hand, he celebrated the
seeming omnipotence of public opinion in a democracy, and his whole hope
for the success of abolitionist agitation rested on the premise that if
reformers could only convince "the masses" of the wrong of slavery, no
human institution could prevent that new "average conscience" from
gaining the force of law. But on the other hand, becoming an
abolitionist meant realizing that "public opinion" in America at present
was horribly corrupt, with disastrous consequences for slaves and
abolitionists alike.

In the first place, American institutions and customs were pervaded by
racial prejudice--a force at odds with the egalitarian principles of
democracy yet buttressed by the assumption that majority opinion about
race should rule. Racial prejudice had the force of law in Phillips's
America precisely because the democratic machinery of government and
society had institutionalized the opinions of the enfranchised, white
majority.

The power of majority opinions about race was not abstract or putative,
either; it was actively punitive, even in Phillips's Boston. Throughout
the antebellum period, violent mobs menaced the personal safety of white
Northern abolitionists--and of Phillips in particular--not to mention
the safety of free black activists and fugitive slaves. When battered by
mob violence, abolitionists tried to persuade themselves that it was
actually a few "gentlemen of property and standing" who were stirring up
the rabble, but the deeper reality was that both gentlemen and rabble
were, on the subject of race and slavery, part of the same not-so-silent
majority, while abolitionists were part of an embattled minority. As
Phillips said in 1855 on the twentieth anniversary of the Boston mob
that led Garrison through the streets with a rope tied around his neck,
"antislavery [was] a sad history to read, sad to look back upon. What a
miserable refuse public opinion has been for the past twenty
years!--what a wretched wreck of all that republican education ought to
have secured!"[^14]

As these anguished exclamations reveal, doing battle with
anti-abolitionists in the North raised troubling questions for Phillips
about the failure of republican education to make public opinion what it
should be. On an ocean of unchained democracy, what safeguard was there
to prevent a vile and irrational prejudice from eroding the rights of a
despised minority? Statesmen in a democracy could provide no such
safeguard; after all, the same majorities that sought to silence
abolitionists, either forcibly or tacitly, also selected the officers of
government. It was no wonder, given this fact, that even Northern
politicians like Daniel Webster did not work to correct the wreck of
public opinion on matters of race and slavery, but instead wallowed in
the refuse themselves, pandering to national majorities in order to
ensure their election, even in defiance of local opposition at home.

Indeed, cases like Webster showed, Phillips quipped in one melancholy
moment, how easy it was for a "democrat" to harden "into a despot" once
he acquired or sought to acquire office, how quickly "Despotism, like a
shrouding mist, steals over the mirror of Freedom," even in a democracy.
While American government should have been providing an example to the
Old World about the superiority of unchained democracy, Phillips worried
that anti-abolitionist mobs were providing aristocratic Europeans like
Sir Robert Peel in England with "proof that republicanism could never
succeed." Committed as he was to a government ruled by the people and
public opinion, Phillips realized that Americans needed more convincing
answers to such criticism, as well as ways to prevent the shrouding mist
of despotism swallowing up American democracy for good.[^15]

Phillips, Tocqueville, and the "Ever-Restless Ocean" of Agitation
-----------------------------------------------------------------

There was no clearer proof that Phillips was deeply concerned about the
dangers of despotism in a democracy than the fact that he admired the
writings of Alexis de Tocqueville, the famous French aristocrat who
traveled the United States in 1831 and then published a wide-ranging
account of what "democracy" looked like in action. Tocqueville was
convinced, like Phillips, that the ocean of unchained democracy was the
wave of the future, in Europe as well as the New World. But as the
offspring of aristocrats who had lost everything in the French
Revolution, Tocqueville viewed this future with more ambivalence and
trepidation than Boston Brahmins like Phillips.

To his delight and surprise, however, Tocqueville found, in the United
States, what he perceived to be a very stable and happy democratic
society in which property and law, instead of being in continual
jeopardy, were largely secure--a result Tocqueville attributed to
various factors, including both the strength of voluntary associations
and the operations of individual, enlightened "self-interest." In his
magisterial two volume work, *Democracy in America*, published in 1835
and 1840, Tocqueville explained to his primarily European audience that
the United States was far from being on the verge of anarchy. On the
contrary, if there was a danger to individual property and freedom in
the United States, it was posed not by an absence of law and order, but
by the all-pervading power of majority opinion. Tocqueville feared that
deference to majority opinion had been so deeply ingrained in every
aspect of American society that "when a man or a party suffers from an
injustice" at the hands of the numerical majority, obtaining redress was
exceedingly difficult.[^16]

To illustrate his concern about the possibility of majoritarian tyranny
in the United States, Tocqueville included a revealing footnote in
*Democracy* reporting on a conversation he had with a white man in
Pennsylvania. There, Tocqueville learned, “freed Negroes” had rights to
vote but sometimes abstained from being present at elections because
“the majority is imbued with the greatest prejudices against Negroes”
and “the magistrates do not feel they have the force to guarantee to
them the rights that the legislator has conferred on them.” To
Tocqueville this situation boggled the mind: “What! The majority that
has the privilege of making the law still wants to have that of
disobeying the law?” While most European conservatives feared that
democracy would license constant disruption and disorderly change, such
incidents brought Tocqueville to a different conclusion: that stasis and
stagnation were greater dangers in a mass democracy than uncontrolled
experimentation and change. At every turn, he concluded, the minority or
abused individual in the United States was confronted by the seamless
power of "what forms the majority." Whether he appealed to "public
opinion," the executive, the police, the legislature, or the judicial
system, any one American was always subject to the absolute will of the
majority.[^17]

These conclusions about American democracy resonated deeply with
Phillips when he read them, given his own experience as a member of a
despised abolitionist minority and his close study of the treatment of
oppressed minorities in the United States. Indeed, in 1860, following a
recent anti-abolitionist mob at the Tremont Temple, Phillips delivered a
speech on "Mobs and Education" that confirmed Tocqueville's concern and
cited the Frenchman explicitly. Phillips began by stating that the
founders of the American republic had “framed a government which, after
two hundred years, is still the wonder and the study of statesman,”
thanks to its "cardinal" ideas of “universal suffrage and the
eligibility of every man to office,” as well as the "sound rule" that
“the majority rules, and law rests on numbers, not on intellect or
virtue.” But Phillips added that these principles also enabled
majorities to act unjustly, either by using the power of “public
opinion” to block minorities from public life, by turning a blind eye to
mobs that actively suppressed minority views, or by allowing the
election of men who were not “competent” and cared more about money and
votes than justice. The result was “the fact which Tocqueville has
noticed, that practically our institutions protect, not the interests of
the whole community, but the interests of the majority.” This was cause
for deep concern, Phillips believed, because "governments exist to
protect the rights of minorities,” particularly those minorities poor in
material resources and poorer in friends. “The loved and the rich need
no protection," Phillips said; "they have many friends and few
enemies."[^18]

As these comments showed, Phillips shared Tocqueville's concern about
the potential for majority rule to turn into majoritarian tyranny, and
by taking up Tocqueville's arguments Phillips joined a transatlantic
conversation about the virtues and vices of democracy that Tocqueville's
book amplified. In at least three ways, however, Phillips's own ideas
about democracy and majority rule differed from those of Tocqueville.

First, Phillips had a much deeper awareness of the overweening power of
white racism in the United States. Though Tocqueville was also an
abolitionist, it is telling that his story about the treatment of free
black voters in Pennsylvania was found in a footnote, for the problems
of slavery and race stood at the margins instead of the center of his
analysis of American democracy. It was partly for this reason that
Tocqueville could be so trusting in the wholesome effects of religious
mores, "enlightened self-interest," and voluntary associations on
American society. For Phillips, on the other hand, the incubus of race
in America stalked every institution and association from plantation to
pulpit to polling booth, which made him far less confident that
individual, self-interested voluntarism alone could assure the health of
democracy. In an 1852 speech, Phillips mused that the “the slave
question halts and lingers, because it cannot get the selfishness of men
on its side,” and to succeed, either in the North or the South,
abolitionists would have to make white men “interested, indignant,
enthusiastic for others, not for themselves” and stir them to "a level
of disinterestedness which the masses seldom reach." Abolitionists would
have to educate Americans in the higher laws of "humanity."[^19]

Secondly, however, Phillips may have ultimately been more confident than
Tocqueville that abolitionists would succeed in this endeavor. Phillips
believed, remember, that over the long run "the people never err" and
the democratic tendencies of the masses tended towards right.
Tocqueville was not so sure. In 1841, Tocqueville revealed in a telling
private note that “I have an intellectual preference for democratic
institutions, but I am aristocratic by instinct, that is I despise and
fear the crowd.” Phillips, by contrast, never suggested a preference,
intellectual, instinctive, or otherwise, for anything other than
democratic institutions and majority rule.[^20]

For the American, as a result, the problem of stopping the drift of
democracy towards majoritarian despotism was in many ways more urgent
than it was for Tocqueville. Tocqueville's primary audience, as many
recent scholars have stressed, was in France and continental Europe, and
his primary concern was to show that democracy was not doomed always to
dissolve into bloody anarchy, the destruction of private property, and
the death of tradition. While Tocqueville astutely noted the dangers
that America's stable majoritarian society posed to individual freedoms,
it was demonstrating stability that most concerned the Frenchman. As a
result, while Tocqueville noticed the dangerous tendencies in American
democracy, particularly in his second volume, he remained vague about
what could be done to fix them.

As a self-described "democrat, ingrained, top to toe," Phillips could
afford no such ambivalence. He *needed* an answer for how to mitigate
the dangers majority rule posed to the health of democracy and the
rights of minorities. And the prescription Phillips usually settled on
was informed by the fact that he could not, like Tocqueville, adopt the
stance of a dispassionate outside observer of the United States. He was,
instead, an active spokesman for an embattled American minority and a
controversial agitator.

That fact made the problems of American democracy more urgent for
Phillips, but they also suggested to him the solution. In several
speeches over the course of his abolitionist career, Phillips argued
that the best way to check the untrammeled power of majorities, without
reverting to the *terra firma* of despotism, was to ensure that the
United States remained in a constant state of agitation. Constant
agitation was precisely what Tocqueville wished to show his European
readers that Americans had avoided; but for Phillips, agitation,
constant deliberation, untrammeled free speech and discussion, and free
rein to the voicing of dissent, were essential to the maintenance of
freedom in a democracy. This is why, Phillips explained in his speech on
"Public Opinion," he believed that “the antislavery agitation is an
important, nay, an essential part of the machinery of the state.”
Agitation was not a “disease,” as anti-abolitionists argued, but nor was
it simply a “medicine” that could be abandoned once disease was cured.
“No; it is the normal state,--the normal state of the nation.” If
republican institutions founded only on majority trusted only “to
constitutions and machinery, to politicians and statesmen, for the
safety of its liberties,” they would never have such safety. That was
why “the antislavery agitation is a necessity of each age,” a movement
that was “not the cure, but the diet of a free people,--not the
homeopathic or the allopathic dose to which a sick land has recourse,
but the daily cold water and the simple bread, the daily diet and
absolute necessity.”[^21]

These lines are worth remembering as we remember Phillips on his
bicentennial anniversary, for Phillips never made it more clear than
here that he did not view the agitation of "public opinion" simply as a
method for obtaining a single goal or set of goals--after which the job
of the agitator could be abandoned and the ocean of unchained democracy
could return to a state of rest. On the contrary, as a top-to-toe
democrat who was yet fully aware of the dangers of democracy and the
potential terrors of public opinion, Phillips was convinced that
agitation was as essential to the survival and health of democracy as
universal suffrage or individual liberty. His answer for the ills of
democracy was not less democracy, but more--not, as the Democratic Party
desired, less agitation on issues like slavery where the majority
consensus was already clear, but more agitation about unpopular views.
Phillips, as usual, put the point best: “never look, therefore, for an
age when the people can be quiet and safe. ... If the Alps, piled in
cold and still sublimity, be the emblem of Despotism," said this
abolitionist democrat, then "the ever-restless ocean is ours, which,
girt within the eternal laws of gravitation, is pure only because never
still.”[^22]

[^1]: "Massachusetts Anti-Slavery Society Annual Meeting," *Liberator*,
    17 February 1865. Phillips made the statement while arguing for
    voting rights for freedmen in the South.

[^2]: "Twenty-Ninth Annual Meeting of the Massachusetts Anti-Slavery
    Society," *Liberator*, 31 January 1862. Phillips's longstanding
    commitments to the expansion of suffrage are sometimes overlooked
    because in the 1840s and 1850s Phillips himself, like many
    Garrisonians, refused to vote under a proslavery Constitution. Yet
    Phillips's position was much like Garrison, who explained his
    support for women's right to vote in 1850 by saying that "I want the
    women to have the right to vote, and I call upon them to demand it
    perseveringly until they possess it. When they have obtained it, it
    will be for them to say whether they will exercise it or not."
    Garrison quoted in John L. Thomas, *The Liberator: William Lloyd
    Garrison, A Biography* (Boston: Little, Brown, 1963), 372-373; see
    also Kraditor, *Means and Ends in American Abolitionism*, 59.

[^3]: Wendell Phillips, "Public Opinion," in *Speeches, Lectures and
    Letters* (Boston: James Redpath, 1863), 45-46; James Brewer Stewart,
    *Wendell Phillips: Liberty's Hero* (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State
    University Press, 1986, 3).

[^4]: Phillips, "Public Opinion," 51-52.

[^5]: "Mr. Thompson's Remarks, at the New England A. S. Convention,"
    *Letters and Addresses by George Thompson, during his Mission in the
    United States* (Boston: Isaac Knapp, 1837), 75.

[^6]: A fuller exploration of Phillips's engagement with these thinkers
    and ideas about the problem of democracy will be provided in my
    book, tentatively titled, "The Ever-Restless Ocean: Garrisonian
    Abolitionism, Transatlantic Reform, and the Problem of Democracy,
    1820-1870."

[^7]: Theodore Wentworth Higginson, *Wendell Phillips* (Boston: Lee and
    Shepard, 1884), xiii. For more examples of Phillips's use of
    Tocqueville beyond the ones discussed here, see "The Ever-Restless
    Ocean."

[^8]: Quoted in Stewart, *Wendell Phillips*, 32.

[^9]: K. Theodore Hoppen, *The Mid-Victorian Generation, 1846-1886* (New
    York: Oxford University Press, 1998), 237-239; Mike Rapport, *1848:
    Year of Revolution* (New York: Basic Books, 2008), 1-41. According
    to Rapport, after the French Revolution of 1830 “the electorate
    swelled to include only 170,000 of France’s richest men: this was a
    mere 0.5 per cent of the French population, a sixth of those who
    enjoyed the vote in Britain after 1832” (p. 3). Timothy Roberts puts
    the size of the French electorate under Louis Philippe at “the
    wealthiest 250,000 men out of a population of some 35 million, about
    twice as large as the U.S. population in 1840.” See Timothy Mason
    Roberts, *Distant Revolutions: 1848 and the Challenge to American
    Exceptionalism* (Charlottesville, Va.: University of Virginia Press,
    2009), 12.

[^10]: Phillips, "Public Opinion," 45; Richard S. Newman, *The
    Transformation of American Abolitionism: Fighting Slavery in the
    Early Republic* (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
    2002).

[^11]: Phillips, "Public Opinion," 52.

[^12]: Phillips, *Speeches, Lectures, and Letters*, 39, 50, 266,
    501-502.

[^13]: Wendell Phillips, "Harper's Ferry," in *Speeches, Lectures, and
    Letters*, 264-65.

[^14]: Phillips, "The Boston Mob," in *Speeches, Lectures and Letters*,
    225.

[^15]: Phillips, "Public Opinion," 52; "The Boston Mob," 225.

[^16]: See Alan S. Kahan, *Alexis de Tocqueville* (New York: Continuum,
    2010), 35-57. See also Kahan, *Aristocratic Liberalism: The Social
    and Political Thought of Jacob Burckhardt, John Stuart Mill, and
    Alexis de Tocqueville* (New York: Oxford University Press, 1992).

[^17]: Alexis de Tocqueville, *Democracy in America*, trans. Harvey C.
    Mansfield and Delba Winthrop (Chicago: University Of Chicago Press,
    2000), 239-242. In the one review of his book that Tocqueville
    believed had understood him right, John Stuart Mill credited the
    Frenchman for realizing that “the real danger in democracy ... is
    not anarchy or love of change,” but instead “stagnation and
    immobility.” Quoted in Kahan, *Aristocratic Liberalism*, 47. These
    were sentiments with which Phillips could also agree.

[^18]: Phillips, "Mobs and Education," in *Speeches, Lectures, and
    Letters*, 321, 341.

[^19]: Phillips, "Sims Anniversary," in *Speeches, Lectures and
    Letters*, 82. Toqueville's traveling partner Gustave de Beaumont
    spent more time writing about race and slavery, perhaps partly by
    prior arrangement with Tocqueville about the division of labor
    between them.

[^20]: Quoted in Leo Damrosch, *Tocqueville's Discovery of America* (New
    York: Farrar, Starus and Giroux, 2010), 204.

[^21]: Phillips, "Public Opinion," 54.

[^22]: Phillips, "Public Opinion," 52, 54.

  [Wendell Phillips and the “Ever-Restless Ocean” of Democracy]: http://mcdaniel.blogs.rice.edu/?p=158
    "Permanent Link: Wendell Phillips and the “Ever-Restless Ocean” of Democracy"
  [Wendell Phillips Bicentennial Commemoration]: http://www.wendellphillips.org/
  [events]: http://www.wendellphillips.org/events.php
