% Rubric for Historical Thinking Skills
% W. Caleb McDaniel
% May 15, 2015

<div class="well">A version of this rubric, which you can [download as a PDF](http://wcm1.web.rice.edu/pdf/rubric.pdf), was distributed to students in my Spring 2015 course, [HIST 118: The United States, 1848 to the Present](http://wcm1.web.rice.edu/pdf/hist118sp15.pdf).</div>

The main objective of this rubric is to provide you with targets for
your own learning in this course. As you read the descriptions of each
historical skill, think about whether they would be fitting descriptions
of your own work and, if not, about what steps you could take to improve
the fit.[^1]

Because learning is a process, be aware that you might slide backwards
as well as move forwards; that is, having seemed to grasp a concept at a
certain point in the semester, your later work might reveal to you and
to me that your grasp was not yet firm. Throughout this rubric, mastery
of a skill refers, by definition, to sustained competence, so do not
relax your efforts to learn and improve as soon as you decide (or hear
from me) that you are showing signs of mastery. While I intend these
descriptions primarily as a help to you, I will also use them when
assessing your progress towards mastery of the five skills. In that
sense, the rubric will also determine your course grade.

1. Narrativity
==============

Craft complex historical narratives that answer a question or solve a problem using sophisticated understandings of causation, continuity, and change over time.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Emerging practice:* Narratives written by new historians are often
simple, sequential accounts that tell readers "what happened" without
indicating why the narrative matters. To beginners, one way of telling
the story is as good as any other. It is difficult to tell why certain
things are included and others are not; obviously relevant issues are
ignored, while tangential issues are included. Attempts to tie events
together as cause and effect, or as evidence of change or continuity,
are weak, simplistic, logically fallacious, or non-existent.

As you begin to *develop competence*, you will start crafting narratives
that are oriented towards solving a problem or answering a question,
though the stakes of the problem or question may be unclear and the
answer attempted by the narrative may not yet be fully convincing.
You'll begin to incorporate a wide range of relevant people, places,
events, etc., but your criteria about what to include or exclude may
still be poor or unevenly applied. Clear chronological markers and
claims about causation, change, and continuity will begin to appear, but
they may be oversimplified (i.e., monocausal, linear, disproportionately
focused on change or continuity, Whiggish, all about progress or all
about declension). Narratives may be teleological; they have an air of
inevitability about them, instead of being qualified by the possibility
that things could have happened differently under different
circumstances. After specific feedback or coaching, you may demonstrate
signs of mastery, but you may have difficulty assessing the quality of
other authors' historical narratives by these same standards.

Achieving *mastery* means demonstrating the ability to write and to
recognize narratives that persuasively address a problem or question
whose significance is made clear. The stakes of the question and the
difficulty of answering it are made as clear as the answer itself. The
range of topics covered will simultaneously indicate discernment (only
those things that are most relevant are included), thoroughness (while
clearly defined, your standard of relevance is capacious enough to bring
a remarkably wide range of issues to bear on the problem), and awareness
of chronology. Claims about causation, change, and continuity are fully
warranted and sophisticated. You present causality as a dense web in
which multiple overlapping factors played a role, instead of only one or
two; elements of change and continuity are treated as contingent,
coexistent, and related, with neither wholly displacing the other. You
consistently probe or avoid simplistic narratives of unbroken progress
or total decline.

2. Evidence
===========

Thoroughly support and revise your claims about the past using critical approaches to the best and most relevant available evidence.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Emerging practice:* As a novice historian, you may assume that the
number of claims about the past still needing specific, empirical
substantiation is relatively small. You will often make claims without
giving specific evidence to support them, or you may give evidence that
is over-general, under-examined, or not sourced. At this stage, you may
use only a small portion of the evidence available to you from course
readings and classes. Evidence is often accepted uncritically by
beginners, who show little awareness of source problems or the
differences between primary and secondary accounts. Sources are treated
as straightforward bearers of information that give unfettered access to
their creators' thinking.

As you begin to *develop competence* in dealing with evidence, you will
make sure that claims needing substantiation with evidence always
receive it, though you may still struggle to see when and why already
substantiated claims need to be revised or extended by new evidence.
Claims are carefully calibrated and limited by available evidence,
though some generalizations may still reach beyond what the evidence
allows. It's easy for others to tell where you are getting specific
evidence from, and that you have engaged with a variety of primary and
secondary sources, though you may still rely disproportionately on a few
sources. You are also beginning to think critically about evidence. You
know to look for information about where evidence came from (*sourcing*)
and to weigh evidence against other evidence (*corroboration*). While
beginners tend to approach sources like "jurors, patiently listening to
testimony and questioning themselves," you are beginning to approach
sources like "prosecuting attorneys."[^2] You notice discrepancies
between accounts and pose questions about the intentions, audiences,
perspectives, and potential blindspots of their creators, though
skepticism about a source may sometimes be misplaced or over-zealous.
You may begin to demonstrate signs of mastery, but only after specific
feedback or coaching.

You'll approach *mastery* in your use of evidence when, as a matter of
course, you provide well-sourced, specific evidence to support, revise,
and qualify your claims, whether large or small. You think creatively
about what evidence is available to you when considering a problem, and
you can make effective use of earlier material from the course that may,
at first glance, seem unrelated to the topic at hand. You use historical
sources not just to substantiate a single claim about that source or its
creator, but to reconstruct broader historical and social contexts in
which all the available evidence makes more sense (*contextualization*).
You also, as a matter of course, ask questions about where the evidence
came from and "nurse doubt" about its reliability or limits.[^3] Yet you
are also able to use a source's problems not just to discount its
reliability, but to reason from those problems to new claims or
insights. You are alternately the "prosecutor" and the "defense
attorney" for sources, and ultimately reach wise judgements; balancing
skepticism with belief, you come to persuasive conclusions about the
most probable explanation for a given body of evidence.

3. Empathy
==========

Look for the potential strengths and insights offered by alternative points of view on or in the past, even or especially when they conflict with your own or conventional understandings.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Empathy is an intellectual and imaginative skill that is required both
when reading sources created in the past and when reading secondary
sources created by other historians. Though often confused with
"sympathy" or "positive feeling," empathy means being sensitive to
context and entertaining even those points of view with which you
disagree; it does not require or necessarily imply agreement.

A *novice historian* who lacks this skill tends to judge the decisions
and ideas of historical actors according to his or her own present-day
opinions, which are sometimes conflated in the novice's mind with
"common sense" or "just the way it is." Beginners are typically not very
interested in seeking out multiple perspectives on an issue; they
identify the actor or historian whose perspective they most agree with,
and then discount or ignore other perspectives. At times, they may not
even show awareness that an alternative perspective exists, even when
presented with evidence to the contrary. Judgments are typically
unjustifiably premature and absolute; even without much consideration,
beginners decide a historical person or idea is all good or all bad.

As you develop the skill of historical empathy, you will begin to show
an awareness that multiple perspectives exist in the past, though you
may still be quick to judge different perspectives as unaccountably
strange or unacceptable. On the other hand, when you do begin to
entertain a historical actor's perspective as plausible, it may still be
based on present-day assumptions about what you or someone you know
would do in a similar situation today. When discussing other historians'
or students' perspectives, you are able to identify differences of
opinion and see the strengths and weakness of other views, though you
may require coaching or specific feedback in order to be persuaded that
a view you dislike has some merit, or that one you like has some
problems.

*Mastery* of historical empathy is defined by an ability to "see and
judge the past on its own terms by trying to understand the mentality,
frames of reference, beliefs, values, intentions, and actions of
historical agents using a variety of historical evidence."[^4] Put more
simply, empathy means understanding historical actors and ideas in the
*context of their times*, which is accessed by the consideration of
multiple perspectives and sources from the past. By acknowledging the
distance between the present and the past, you are able to make even
strange or outdated views comprehensible to contemporary minds. You are
not only sensitive to multiple perspectives on an issue that exist in
the historical record, but also can imagine relevant perspectives that
may not have been included in the record at all. When articulating your
own positions about the past, you are able to encompass and account for
plausible alternative views while articulating why yours is preferable.
Because you can see both the good and the bad in perspectives other than
your own, your own conclusions are well-grounded but tentative and your
criticisms of others are charitable and constructive.

4. Style
========

Communicate your ideas clearly and concisely in writing, with an appropriate level of detail and awareness of audience.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Beginning writers may struggle to communicate clearly due to lack of
organization, too much or too little detail, failure to consider what
the intended audience already knows, or a weak grasp of basic writing
conventions pertaining to word choice, grammar, and sentence fluency.
Beginners also struggle to find their own voice, relying heavily instead
on excessively long quotations from others or poorly sourced paraphrases
of someone else's material. Several of these problems often appear
together in a piece of writing.

As your command of style develops, however, your writing will be
compellingly structured so as to highlight and develop a central idea or
theme, with key points stated early or late in the text and/or its
constituent parts. Paragraph breaks, signposts, and navigational words
(such as "such as," "however," "nonetheless," "moreover," "next," and
"in sum") help to move the reader through the text. You will craft your
writing with awareness of the audience and the purpose for writing,
conveying your points with precise words and fluent sentences that
engage the reader's interest. Your writing will show a good grasp of
standard writing conventions and grammatical rules, though you may still
struggle with one or two recurring grammatical problems. Through
revision of your own work, you will minimize repetition, locate typos
and run-on sentences, and carefully source quotations from or allusions
to other authors.

*Masterful* style means being able to "pull together" all of these
skills with minimal coaching or feedback. A masterful writer has
internalized these writing conventions so that errors and unclear
passages tend to be very few in submitted assignments. Only a few minor
touch-ups would make the text suitable for publication in the
appropriate venue.

5. Self-reflection
==================

Show you can think reflexively and critically about your own ongoing development as a student of history.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

History students without the habit of critical self-reflection tend to
judge their own work by two criteria: whether the work was done, and
whether significant effort was expended to do it. They show very little
interest in their own progress towards the skills outlined above, and
they seem unaware of how their own unexamined assumptions, settled
convictions, habits of thinking, or gaps in knowledge might present
obstacles to that development. Often, students of this sort respond to
feedback with defensiveness or redirection; a non-reflexive thinker
holds that someone else is *always* to blame for their own failure to
understand or persuade.

Self-reflective students of history, on the other hand, are constantly
questioning their own convictions and thinking in order to sort out
warranted beliefs from prejudices. They are aware of and accurately
assess the limits of their own knowledge, and they recognize unique
styles or beliefs that might unjustifiably color their understanding.
They hold their views on the past provisionally, in the sense that they
are willing to change their minds when evidence or logic demands it.
They are aware that there may be multiple ways to accomplish a task and
think hard about which way would be best. Most of all, they can engage
in effective "meta-thinking" about their own learning, qualitatively
evaluating their own work by the criteria used by historians more
generally, such as the criteria described in this rubric.

Evidence for the mastery of this skill is easiest to see when students
are asked to evaluate their own learning progress, as you will be in the
course. If your responses to such questions show awareness of changes in
your own thinking, and you can effectively link those changes to the
specific skills we are aiming to develop in the course, you are
demonstrating the kind of self-reflection that good historians need.
Moreover, even in everyday exchanges with me and your peers, you show
that you regularly reflect on the meaning of what you have learned.
Constructive criticism is not only gratefully received, but assimilated
and applied, when warranted, in new contexts. In all of these ways,
self-reflective students are wise, circumspect, and characterized by
intellectual integrity; they take responsibility for their own learning
and demonstrate a willingness to develop and use new historical thinking
skills.

[^1]: Parts of this rubric, especially the points on style and
    self-reflection, are directly indebted to Grant Wiggins and Jay
    McTighe, *Understanding by Design*, second edition (Alexandria, Va.:
    ASCD, 2005).

[^2]: The juror versus attorney metaphor comes from Sam Wineburg,
    *Historical Thinking and Other Unnatural Acts: Charting the Future
    of Teaching the Past* (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 2001),
    77.

[^3]: The phrase "nurse doubt" comes from the final episode of the
    popular Serial podcast, which was also, according to historian Eric
    Rauchway, a "pretty good dramatization of the historical process."
    See <http://bit.ly/1xZRvXK>.

[^4]: This definition is drawn from Kaya Yilmaz, "Historical Empathy and
    Its Implications for Classroom Practices in Schools," *The History
    Teacher* 40, no. 3 (May 2007), 331.
